14 Creating zones of possibilities:
Combining social contexts for instruction

Luis C. Moll and James B. Greenberg

Of great value, in both scientific and practical respects, would be the pedagogicalpsychological investigation of the reciprocal relation between learning activity and
the productive labor that pupils undertake together with adults. This problem has
received precious little attention by developmental and pedagogical psychology in
the Soviet Union, although the development of learning activity is closely tied
precisely to productive activity.
V. V. Davydov (1988, p. 34)

One of the most interesting and important contributions of Vygotskian psychology
is the proposal that human thinking must be understood in its concrete social and
historical circumstances. As Luria (1982) explained it, to understand thinking one
must go beyond the human organism. One must search for the origins of “conscious
activity,” not in the “recesses of the human brain or in the depths of the spirit, but
in the external conditions of life.” “Above all,” Luria continued, “this means that
one must seek these origins in the external processes of social life, in the social and
historical forms of human existence” (p. 25). He later reiterated as follows:
The basic difference between our approach and that of traditional psychology will
be that we are not seeking the origins of human consciousness in the depths of the
“soul” or in the independently acting mechanisms of the brain. . . . Rather, we
are operating in an entirely different sphere - in humans’ actual relationship with
reality, in their social history, which is closely tied to labor and language. (1982,
p. 27)

In what follows we describe a research project that studies households’ social
histories, especially their labor and language, and attempts to derive instructional
innovations from such an analysis. In line with the quotation from Davydov (1988),
a leading Soviet psychologist, our focus is on the labor-related activities that occur
within and among households and on the participation of students in these activities.
Additionally, we experiment with how to create the reciprocal relations that Davy­
dov mentions between such activities and instruction in schools. As in the Soviet
Union, this connection between productive (labor-related) and learning (schoolrelated) activities has received little attention in this country (but see, e.g., Heath,
1983; Laboratory of Comparative Human Cognition, 1986; Trueba & DelgadoGañán, 1988; Weisner & Gallimore, 1985).
319

320

L. C. M o l l a n d J. B. G r e e n b e r g

Our research project, still in progress, consists of three main, interrelated activi­
ties conducted simultaneously as part of a research/teaching system: (1) an ethno­
graphic analysis of the transmission of knowledge and skills among households in
a Hispanic community of Tucson; (2) creation of an after-school laboratory where
researchers and teachers use community information to experiment with literacy
instruction; and (3) classroom observations in which we examine existing methods
of instruction and explore how to change instruction by applying what is learned at
the after-school site (see Moll, Vélez-Ibáñez, & Greenberg, 1988). We build on the
idea that every household is, in a very real sense, an educational setting in which
the major function is to transmit knowledge that enhances the survival of its depen­
dents. The content and manner of this transmission, the households’ zones of prox­
imal development, if you will, are the central feature of the ethnographic study. In
order to examine the instructional potential of these household activities, we have
created an after-school “lab” within which researchers, teachers, and students meet
to experiment with the teaching of literacy. We think of this lab setting, following
Vygotsky, as a “mediating” structure that facilitates strategic connections, multiple
paths, between classrooms and households. The goal of the lab is to support new
teaching practices that make ample use of both the school’s and the community’s
resources.
We start by presenting key elements of our household analysis. In particular, we
highlight the social sharing of knowledge as part of the households’ functioning,
what we have labeled the exchange of “funds of knowledge” (Greenberg, 1989;
Vélez-Ibáñez, 1988a). We then contrast these household events with the usual so­
cial organization of instruction in classrooms and follow with two case studies that
attempt to combine strategically household and classroom contexts to develop in­
novations in literacy instruction. Throughout, we indicate how we are using Vygotskian concepts in our investigation. We are influenced by his emphasis on the inter­
dependence of children’s learning with the socially provided resources to support
that learning. We have found his ideas on mediation particularly fruitful in helping
to create more advanced social circumstances for teaching and learning (Vygotsky,
1978, 1987).

Zones of knowledge
Our household study1 examines what Milardo (1988) has called the complex “in­
terconnections bonding families to their social environments of kin, friends, neigh­
bors, co-workers and acquaintances” (p. 9). More specifically, we are studying
families within a Hispanic, predominantly Mexican,2 working-class community in
Tucson, Arizona. Economically and socially, Tucson can be described as a highly
stratified city with a dual class structure. For example, 75% of the Mexican popu­
lation may be found in the lower-paid craft, assembly, service, and laborer occu­
pations. Mexican wages are 80% that of Anglos, and Mexicans are twice as likely
as Anglos to be below the poverty line. The working-class segment of the Mexican

Creating zones of possibilities

321

population is three times larger than both the middle and upper economic class
segments, whereas the opposite relationship is true of the Anglos’ class distribution.
Further, 75% of Mexicans have incomes (average annual income of $14,500) that
are within the lowest 25% of the Anglo incomes. In fact, Mexicans earn less even
when the effects of education are controlled statistically. This dual economy in great
part determines where people live and contributes to the geographic separation and
ethnic concentration of the populations. Residentially, about 75% of the Mexican
population is concentrated in “barrios” located in the city’s south side. This social
and economic stratification is also reflected educationally. For example, only 27%
of Mexicans have a median education level above 13.3 years, in contrast to 73%
for the Anglo population (see Vélez-Ibáñez, Greenberg, & Johnstone, 1984).
Our analysis concentrates on a pervasive and significant sociocultural practice or
activity that we have called confianza (mutual trust) (see Greenberg, 1984, 1989;
Vélez-Ibáñez, 1983a, 1983b, 1986, 1988a, 1988b; also see, e.g., Aguilar, 1984;
Lomnitz, 1977; Stack, 1974; Wellman, 1985). This term refers to reciprocal ex­
change relations that form social networks among households. These networks,
often developed in response to difficult economic conditions, facilitate at least three
important socioeconomic functions. First, they serve as a buffer against uncertain
and changing economic circumstances. In particular, the networks facilitate differ­
ent forms of economic assistance and labor cooperation that help families avoid the
expenses involved in using secondary institutions, such as plumbing companies or
automobile repair shops. Second, although not well understood, these networks
function to “penetrate” labor markets. That is, these relations often serve as a
pipeline to jobs in both the formal and the informal economy and as a way to bring
labor markets “into” the networks. For example, several of the men and women in
our sample obtained their jobs through family and non-kin contacts that form part
of their networks. Finally, these networks serve important emotional and service
functions, providing assistance of different types, most prominently with child care
and rearing. In brief, these networks form social contexts for the transmission of
knowledge, skills, and information, as well as cultural values and norms (VélezIbáñez, 1986, 1988a).
Our work highlights the multiple, “thick” social relationships that constitute
household life within this Mexican working-class community. Consider the follow­
ing example taken from case study analyses we are currently developing of the
Aguilar and the Morales (pseudonyms) families.
In the dense social networks in which the Aguilar and Morales households are
embedded as central nodes, exchange of mutual help not only occurs constantly but
is a defining feature of social relations and even shapes household composition. The
Aguilar household, for example, is an extended household which, in addition to
Mr. Aguilar’s immediate family, includes his brother, his brother’s wife, and his
nephew, who works in construction but is temporarily out of work. Aguilar’s brother
came to live with them when he fell ill and could no longer work. The Aguilars
also have four married children who have their own households. Their eldest son,

322

L. C. M o l l a n d J. B. G r e e n b e r g

Carlos, lives nearby and works in construction, even though he has a degree in
bookkeeping from Mexico. Susana, their eldest daughter, works in a factory that
produces telephones and is a divorced mother with two daughters. Another of Mrs.
Aguilar’s daughters, Ana, is a bookkeeper. Still another, Maria, lives in Coolidge,
Arizona, and works as a secretary for the Department of Transportation. Mrs. Agui­
lar’s daughters come to visit or for babysitting almost daily. Susana’s household, in
particular, is a satellite to that of her parents. Her mother babysits for her while she
is at work, and they spend hours together almost daily. Not only are Mrs. Aguilar’s
children regular visitors, but Mr. Morales, his wife, and their children come over
frequently. The Aguilars’ neighbors also visit them almost daily. As well, the Aguilars receive visitors regularly from Sonora (Mexico), and not just relatives but often
friends of relatives. Mrs. Aguilar is central to the maintenance of these relation­
ships. She serves as a channel for communicating messages, babysits her grand­
children, takes care of her sick brother-in-law, and gives advice. As Mrs. Aguilar
expressed it, “I was molded the old way in a united family. We used to live close
to one another and get together often; now we live in different towns, so we stay
close by helping each other in times of need.”
Obviously, not all household relations are as complex, multistranded, or recip­
rocal; many, if not most, family relations are based on simple acquaintance. We
have focused on the more intimate and complex relationships because of their im­
portance in obtaining and providing a variety of resources to families (see VélezIbáñez, 1988a). As Wellman (1985) has suggested, densely knit networks may be
structurally better suited for conserving and controlling existing resources. Each
household in our sample consists of approximately six members and has about six
related (kin) households in the general community (some as many as 16). Approx­
imately 90% of our sample reports assisting others with tasks or chores, including
household repairs and child care, which suggests an ongoing exchange. These ex­
change relations, we should note, are not limited to kin or to any particular ethnic
group; they also incorporate nonrelatives and different age groups. These families’
multiple relationships contrast with the singular, narrow teacher-child relationship
common in classrooms (see, e.g., Goodlad, 1984). In contrast to household net­
works, classrooms are relatively isolated entities, something quite uncommon out­
side the classroom.
The most important function of these clustered households, and the reason why
they are the object of our analysis, is that they share or exchange what we have
termed funds of knowledge. Greenberg (1989) has suggested that one way to under­
stand this concept is in relation to other household funds. For example, Wolf (1966),
in his discussion of household economy, identified several funds that households
must manipulate for subsistence and development. The most basic are caloric funds,
needed to furnish minimum caloric intake to sustain life. He also mentioned other
funds such as funds of rent, a charge on the households’ production resulting from
a superior claim on the land or housing. This charge, depending on the situation,
may be paid in money, labor, or produce. There are also replacement funds, which

Creating zones of possibilities

323

represent the amount needed to replace or maintain minimum equipment for pro­
duction and consumption, and ceremonial funds, used to sustain symbolic aspects
of social relationships, such as marriage ceremonies and other rituals found in the
social order. Each of these funds, and others we have not mentioned, entails a
broader set of activities which require specific knowledge of strategic importance to
households. These bodies of knowledge are what we call funds of knowledge.
Greenberg (1989) has referred to funds of knowledge as an “operations manual of
essential information and strategies households need to maintain their well being’ ’
(P- 2).
As part of our analysis we are tracing the social history of specific funds of
knowledge. Within our study sample much of the knowledge is related to the house­
holds’ rural origins. Many of the families have members who were farmers and
ranchers, relatives involved in these activities, or are themselves engaged in these
activities around Tucson. The knowledge and skills in these households are exten­
sive. For example, we have visited families that know about different soils, the
cultivation of plants, and water management. Other families know about animal
husbandry, veterinary medicine, ranch economy, and mechanics, as well as carpen­
try, masonry, electrical wiring, and fencing. We also find families that employ folk
remedies and herbal cures or other first-aid procedures, or that practice midwifery.
Obviously, not every household in our sample possesses knowledge about all of
these matters. But that is precisely the point. It is unnecessary and unfeasible for
individual persons or households to possess all this knowledge; when needed, such
knowledge is available and accessible through social networks.
This social distribution of knowledge is especially important in urban settings
within a wage economy, as the funds of knowledge required of workers may be­
come much more narrow and specialized than, for example, in a rural, farm envi­
ronment. Households in our sample share not only knowledge regarding repair of
homes and automobiles, home remedies, planting and gardening, as mentioned, but
funds of knowledge specific to urban living, such as access to institutional assis­
tance, school programs, transportation, occupational opportunities, and other ser­
vices. In short, households' funds of knowledge are wide-ranging and abundant.
They are central to home life and to the relationship of the families to others in their
community. As Vélez-Ibáñez (1988b) has observed, funds of knowledge are the
“nuts and bolts for survival.”
Besides depicting their origins and content, we are also analyzing how specific
household activities make use of these funds of knowledge, that is, the domains
within which they may be learned, organized, and transmitted. We have found there
are identifiable household pedagogies, identifiable social organizations to learning
(cf. Greenfield & Lave, 1982). These strategies for teaching and learning must be
understood in context, that is, in relation to the social history of the families, the
content of the funds of knowledge, and the goals of teaching. Consider the follow­
ing example from our case studies.
Many of Mr. Zavala’s (a pseudonym) funds of knowledge have their roots in his

324

L. C. M o l l a n d J. B. G r e e n b e r g

father’s skills: mechanics, construction, washing machine and refrigerator repair.
Zavala’s father worked for many years in a gasoline station; later he worked in
construction and also repaired washers and refrigerators. When they were growing
up, Zavala and his brothers often helped their father with these tasks. Unlike the
elder Zavala, who had little use for education and bragged that he had gotten ahead
without it, his son has had to rely more on formal training, schooling, and selfstudy to acquire the skills he has needed to get ahead. Whereas his father who had
little education could become a jack-of-all-trades through skills learned on the job,
as urban labor markets have become increasingly segmented and highly specialized
it has become harder and harder to follow the path his father followed. Unlike his
father, the younger Zavala believes that education is essential. For example, to get
extra training while working as an airplane mechanic, he went to welding school.
Again, when he had his repair shop - though he had learned something of how to
repair appliances from his father - he needed to study books and manuals on how
to repair the ever more complex new washing machines and refrigerators. Like his
father, Zavala has taught practical skills to Juan (his son) by including him in do­
mestic chores and other activities. For example, when Zavala repairs the car, he
asks Juan to bring him the tools he needs. Even such minimal inclusion in these
tasks allows Juan to learn by observing the whole task and by asking questions
about what his father is doing. In this way Juan has learned enough to do simple
repairs around the house, such as fixing the toilet by himself.
Also consider an example from the Aguilar family. Mr. Aguilar’s son Alfredo
often helps with (household) chores, especially when they are cooperatively orga­
nized, as is common in activities involving exchange. His help in fixing cars is
typical of the way in which children are taught in these contexts. In activities like
fixing cars, there are many potential entry points, and Aguilar lets Alfredo contrib­
ute by doing things he likes to do; at the same time, Aguilar may exclude him from
other tasks. Thus Aguilar takes his cue from the child about what he would like to
do and then decides whether or not he is capable of it. If he is not, the father may
suggest things that he feels are within the child’s scope. Even though Alfredo’s help
is minimal - helping to put in screws, checking the oil - and often ends in a mess
- as Mrs. Aguilar put it, le gusta empuercarse ( ‘ ‘he likes to get dirty’ ’) - his efforts
are not discouraged. There seems to be an implicit understanding that, even though
it might be easier not to have the child’s help, his participation in the whole task is
an essential part of learning.
A particularly powerful strategy is the creation by a family of special circum­
stances within which the children or others have ample opportunities to acquire
skills or values the family wants them to learn. A good example is the Morales
family: The Aguilars and the Moraleses are typical cross-border families with rural
roots, part of an extended family - Mrs. Aguilar is Mr. Morales’s sister - which
came to Tucson from the northern Sonoran (Mexico) towns of Esqueda and Fron­
teras. The Moraleses had a parcel of land on an ejido. Mr. Aguilar’s father had

Creating zones of possibilities

325

been a cowboy and had worked on a large ranch owned by the descendants of a
governor of Sonora in the 19th century. Like his father, Aguilar is a cowboy. Al­
though he worked for a time in construction after coming to the United States, he
is currently employed on a cattle ranch near Pinal, Arizona, where he spends 5 or
6 days a week, coming home only on Tuesdays. Like Mr. Aguilar, Mr. Morales
initially found work in construction, but unlike his brother-in-law, he eventually
formed his own company: Morales Patio Construction. This family concern also
employs his son as well as his daughter-in-law as their secretary/bookkeeper.
Nevertheless, the Moraleses’s rural roots remain strong, even idealized. In their
back yard, the Moraleses have re-created a “rancho” complete with pony and other
animals. Moreover, the family owns a small ranch north of Tucson that serves as a
“recreation center” and locus for learning. They take their children and grandchil­
dren not just to help with the chores (running the tractor, feeding animals, building
fences) but, more importantly, to teach them the funds of knowledge entailed in
these old family traditions, which cannot be learned in an urban context.
Another compelling example comes from the Zavala family, discussed above.
Notice that they don’t share the social origins of the Aguilar and Morales families,
so the content of their funds of knowledge and the preferred modes of transmission
differ. The Zavalas are an urban working-class family, with no ties to the rural
hinterland. They have seven children. Their eldest daughter, however, is no longer
at home but lives with her boyfriend and son. Mr. Zavala is best characterized as
an entrepreneur. He works as a builder, part-time, and owns some apartments in
Tucson and properties in Nogales (a nearby border town). Mrs. Zavala was bom in
Albuquerque, New Mexico, in 1950 but came to Tucson as a young child; she left
school in the 11th grade. Mr. Zavala was bom in Nogales, Sonora, in 1947, where
he lived until he finished the sixth grade. His father too was from Nogales. His
father had little education and began to work at the age of 9 to help support the
family. His family then moved to Nogales, Arizona, where he went to school for
another 2 years. When he was 17, Zavala left home and joined the army and spent
2 years stationed on military bases in California and Texas. After his discharge, he
returned to Nogales, Arizona, and worked for a year installing television cable and
heating and cooling ducts. In 1967 Zavala came to Tucson, first working as a house
painter for 6 months, then in an airplane repair shop where he worked for 3 years.
In 1971 he opened a washing machine and refrigerator repair shop, a business he
had for 3 years. Since 1974, Zavala works in construction part-time, builds and
sells houses, and owns four apartments (two of which he built in the back yard of
his home).
Everyone in the Zavala household, including the children, is involved in informalsector economic activities to help the family. Juan, for example, who is in the sixth
grade, has a bicycle shop in the back of the house. He buys used parts at a swap
meet and assembles them to build bicycles, which he sells at the yard sales his
family holds regularly. He is also building a go-cart and says he is going to charge

326

L . C. M o l l a n d J. B. G r e e n b e r g

kids 15 cents a ride. His sisters Carmen and Zoraida sell candies, which their mother
buys in Nogales, to their schoolmates. The children have used the money they have
earned to buy the family a video cassette recorder.
What is important about these activities is not necessarily that a youngster can fix
a car or a toilet, use farm equipment, or build a bicycle, but the social matrix in
which these skills are acquired. In the Zavala family, as in the Aguilar and Morales
families, contexts for assisted performance are constantly generated by their pro­
ductive activity and by their relations of exchange. These social relations provide a
motive and a context for applying and for acquiring knowledge. The key point is
that funds of knowledge are manifested through events or activities. That is, funds
of knowledge are not possessions or traits of people in the family but characteristics
of people-in-an-activity. Our household observations suggest the importance of tak­
ing into account not only visible, apparent knowledge, where contexts of applica­
tion, such as cooking a meal, are ubiquitous, but more latent, hidden knowledge,
displayed in helping or teaching others or as part of the families’ production. Within
these activities, much of the teaching and learning is initiated by the children’s
interests and their questions. That is, children are active in creating their own activ­
ities or are active within the structure of the tasks created by the adults. In either
case, knowledge is obtained by the children, not imposed by the adults.
What are some implications for instruction of the sketch provided above? In our
terms, there are various household zones of proximal development, manifested in
different ways depending on the social history of the family and the purpose and
goal of the activity. These zones are clearly content- or knowledge-based and rarely
trivial. They usually matter; that is, they are authentic. It is when the content of the
interactions is important or needed that people are motivated to establish the social
contexts for the transfer or application of knowledge and other resources. It follows
that it is by creating similar authentic activities in schools that we can access these
funds of knowledge and investigate their relevance for academic instruction.
These household zones are also adaptive in that they are organized in many ways,
often diffuse, and involve multiple persons. In our terms, they are multistranded.
A key characteristic of the social exchanges is their reciprocity. In fact, reciprocity
is the glue maintaining the structure of these important social relationships. As
Vélez-Ibáñez (1988a) has observed, reciprocity represents an “attempt to establish
a social relationship on an enduring basis. Whether symmetrical or asymmetrical,
the exchange expresses and symbolizes human social interdependence” (p. 142).
That is, reciprocal practices establish serious obligations that are not only based on
the assumption of confianza (trust) but lead to the reestablishment of trust with each
exchange and the development of long-term relationships. Each exchange with
kinsmen, friends, and neighbors not only entails many practical activities (every­
thing from home and automobile repair to animal husbandry and music) but con­
stantly provides contexts in which proximal development can occur - contexts where
children have ample opportunities to participate with people whom they trust. There

Creating zones of possibilities

327

are, as Valsiner (1988) puts it, redundant ways of constructing zones of proximal
development (ZPD):
The ZPD can be constructed not only by the purposeful efforts of the instructor of
the child, but also by cultural structuring of the environment in such ways that the
developing child at any time is guided by his/her environment to make use of the
parts of that environment that are currently within the ZPD. ... not only instruc­
tion but also the individual learner can define the ZPD, given the culturally struc­
tured life environment that provided the “stimulus means” for the child’s own
construction of the ZPD and, by that, of the child’s own future development, (p.
147)

Without a focus on social relationships and persons-in-activities, it is very easy
for outsiders (educators) to underestimate the wealth of funds of knowledge avail­
able in working-class households. Funds of knowledge are available in these house­
holds regardless of the families’ years of formal schooling or prominence assigned
to literacy. Yet this knowledge and its forms of transmission, as we discuss in the
next section, rarely make their way into classrooms in any substantive way. From
our perspective, then, funds of knowledge represent a major, untapped resource for
academic instruction.

Zones of possibilities
In what follows we describe two case studies developed collaboratively with teach­
ers. Both case studies, or modules, as we call them, originated through our discus­
sions with teachers at the after-school lab. These modules are intended to facilitate
a connection among the household analysis, work at the after-school lab, and class­
room practices. That is, these modules are ways to conduct “formative” or “teach­
ing” experiments in classrooms, and their development is closely monitored, es­
pecially through participant observations (see Hedegaard, this volume; Moll &
R. Diaz, 1987). The modules take into account the specifics of each classroom, the
teacher and the students, and instructional constraints the teachers may face and
specific goals they may want to attain. Additionally, each module allows for indepth study of a topic or theme. This theme of study must be conducive to plenty
of reading and writing and to going beyond current instructional practices. Finally,
it must be a theme that is relevant to the classroom curriculum.
The first case study started as a classroom demonstration intended to motivate the
children to write. The children’s activities, however, quickly became elaborate,
extending far beyond the classroom, with important consequences for their writing.
The second case study involved a teacher’s attempts to organize instruction in ways
that connect with households’ funds of knowledge. In implementing these activi­
ties, and in developing others, we have come to realize fully the difficulty of intro­
ducing innovations into practice (see Gallimore & Tharp, this volume). Teachers
face various constraints, including district goals that must be accomplished, a cur-,
riculum to follow, tests to administer, in-services to attend, and what seems an

328

L. C. M oll a n d J. B. G r e e n b e r g

overwhelming amount of paper work to complete. In addition, current instructional
practices, with the usual requirements of following a specific curricular sequence
with its emphasis on the teacher as the holder and transmitter of knowledge, repre­
sent a formidable obstacle to implementing instructional innovations. We have come
to appreciate better Langer and Applebee’s (1986, 1987) conclusion that traditional
instructional practices make introducing innovations into classrooms a very difficult
task. That is, the majority of school tasks, with their rote recitation requirements,
provide students “little room to claim ownership for what was being written or
read” (Langer & Applebee, 1986, p. 196, italics added). These instructional prac­
tices also provide teachers and researchers little room to maneuver in trying out new
methods of instruction.
In our classroom observations we have found many of the rote and reductionist
instructional elements that characterize working-class schooling in general (see,
e.g., Anyon, 1980; Oakes, 1986). Lessons rarely extend beyond the classroom or
incorporate ideas, interests, or activities of the students and their families. Literacy
instruction is heavily dependent on basal readers, and what is read or written is
usually imposed; student interests are rarely considered. Furthermore, with impor­
tant exceptions, the intellectual level of the lessons is low; we have observed infre­
quently activities that are clearly intellectually challenging to the students or activ­
ities requiring research or investigation on the part of the students. It is these social
arrangements for learning that prompted Greenberg (1989) to call classrooms “zones
of underdevelopment.”
Nevertheless, classrooms are not uniform in their practices. In all of the class­
rooms we have observed some lessons that were advanced, interesting, or demand­
ing of the students. We borrow from the notes of one of our classroom observers.3
Instruction in this [third-grade, bilingual] classroom . . . occurs through a struc­
ture that encourages children to be responsible and independent. There was no
whole group instruction or teacher directed activity. Rather, the students know
what to do and proceeded with very little help from the teacher. The students were
working on individual contracts for this [Ancient Egypt] theme so they each made
decisions about what to do for the extended period of time, set about doing it and
only conferred with the teacher about free time requests or help with materials.
. . . The concept of negotiation is strong in this classroom. Present in the negotia­
tion process is the attitude that the students are very involved in developing their
own curriculum. The teacher verbalized the negotiation process with the students
both in a large group and individually and checked that the students kept their end
of the bargain. . . . The intellectual level is quite high and challenging in this
classroom and the teacher feels it is better to have high expectations for all the
students than to limit their progress. The expectation is set for the highest abilities
and then the teacher and the aide help the students achieve their best given that
expectation. The teacher says there are very few children who have difficulty meet­
ing her high goals. The curriculum involved in the current Ancient Egypt theme
was impressive in that the amount of content is so high. The [students’] contract
represents that content in its depth and difficulty. It appears to me that the intellec­
tual level of this third grade classroom is higher than many classrooms at the 4th,
5th and 6th grade levels.

Creating zones of possibilities

329

These more advanced lessons, although unusual, are clearly not unique (see Moll,
1988). There exist in every classroom opportunities for change. That is, all lessons
are not automatically rote learning, and not all teachers’ questioning requests some
form of factual recitation from the students; the teachers try to create variety within
their classrooms. It is upon this variety that we build in creating social conditions
that engage students in more advanced instructional activities.
Therefore, an important goal of the lab was to develop a collegial, working re­
lationship between the teachers and researchers. We wanted to turn the lab into a
place where we could provide the teachers with strategic assistance in developing
and implementing innovations (cf. Berliner, 1985; Laboratory of Comparative Hu­
man Cognition, 1982). In our work with teachers we emphasized the need for stu­
dents to assume more control over their own learning, in ways similar to the class­
room described above. We introduced the idea of students deciding their own units
of study, seeking answers to their own questions, and using themselves and their
peers as resources for thinking. The role of the teachers, we proposed, was to
facilitate or mediate the students’ activities but not to control them by imposing a
required sequence or task or by providing answers. From our perspective, teachers
must trust (and assist) students to make appropriate decisions and grow into self­
responsibility (see Goodman & Goodman, this volume; Langer, 1987; Moll, 1989).

The first case study
This first case study4 started from two teachers’ concerns about their students’ lack
of writing. The students in both classrooms (fourth and fifth grades) are predomi­
nantly Mexican, all of them being bilingual or monolingual Spanish speakers. There
is a wide range of literacy abilities within these classrooms, including students in
the beginning stages and proficient students performing above grade level. The
child we feature in the case study, Elena (a pseudonym), is in the fifth grade and
classified as Spanish monolingual. A quiet and soft-spoken child, Elena formed part
of a small group of students who preferred to write in Spanish. We concentrate on
Elena’s activities and writing because the details of her work help illustrate essential
elements of our study. However, Elena is not unique; in fact, she is representative
of several other students in these classrooms.
The module was organized around three activities. The first was the formation of
a study group between the teachers and the researchers. In these study groups the
participants read research articles on literacy instruction and discussed how to apply
some of these ideas in practice. These meetings, held weekly with the teachers as
part of the after-school lab, also served to plan the modules and evaluate their
progress. The second activity involved demonstration lessons. The teachers invited
the researchers to implement lessons in their classrooms that would interest the
students in writing. In particular, they were interested in eliciting topics from stu­
dents and organizing lessons to help the students address those topics in writing.

330

L. C. M o l l a n d J. B. G r e e n b e r g

After the demonstration lessons, one of the teachers identified 11 students who were
interested in developing a video that would explore in more depth specific topics of
interest to the students. This combination writing/video development activity be­
came too elaborate to be confined to the classroom. The students, therefore, agreed
to work with the researchers on the lessons at the after-school lab, and it became
one of the regular lab activities.
We will summarize the module by describing three phases in its development:
the initial writing, the extension to the household, and writing to develop the video.
For each phase, we provide examples of Elena’s writing. It is important to under­
stand the changes in her writing in the context of the specific module activities. We
will show how Elena drew on the available resources to develop her writing and her
ideas, and how her writing was shaped by the goals and structure of the activity.
Particularly important for our purposes is how Elena used writing as a tool to extend
and organize her thinking and plan her activities, how Elena assumed ownership of
the activity and the writing process. The key role of the adults in this process was
in mediating the activities, especially in helping the students to be active in creating
and shaping their tasks. The adults did not control the writing, as is common in
classrooms; instead, they oriented the students to the use of other persons and ma­
terials in developing their writing. That is, following our household analysis, they
obtained funds of knowledge by connecting the literacy activity to parents, com­
munity organizations, and libraries, among other resources.
The module also shows that by studying children in diverse circumstances we
gain a more sophisticated perspective on what they are capable of doing. The stu­
dents themselves initiated most of the writing and the accompanying activities. In
the case of Elena, none of the writing, except the initial writing, was required by
the instructor. As such, both the students’ and the instructor’s activities departed
considerably from the usual classroom practices.
Initial writing. As part of the demonstration lessons, the children in the classroom
brainstormed a list of topics for writing, discussed topics of special interest to them,
and began writing on one of the topics. Some of the students, including Elena, were
particularly interested in developing further their computer communications with a
school in Ponce, Puerto Rico, one of the lab’s ongoing activities.5 Elena formed
part of a group of students who preferred the lesson in Spanish. Although most of
these children understood much of the demonstration lessons, conducted in English,
they felt more confident discussing their topics and writing in Spanish. During the
first lesson, Elena, like many of her classmates, appeared unsure. She did not seem
confident in sharing her responses and writing and did not actively participate in the
lesson; she appeared unresponsive. When it was time to write, Elena said, “Pero
Miss, no se que escribir.” The instructor encouraged Elena to select one of her
topics and write about it. After some hesitation, she began to write about her ideas
of what a school in Ponce (Puerto Rico) might be like. This draft serves as Elena’s
first writing sample. She wrote as follows:

Creating zones of possibilities

331

Las escuelas an decer como un cuarto chico son como echas comodamente para
los alumnos y los maestros también ande tener acientos echos de madera y pintados
también an de estar limpias y acomodada ande ser como un techo de lamina luego
como sacate encima para que de sombra también los usan para que es te fresca en
el calor y caliente en el frió ellosan de estar my agusto en las escuelas porque a
ellos les gusta el modo decer las escuelas también las escuelas están echas de lodo
y queda un poco ásperas Las . . . (E.O., 3/20/89)
(The schools must be like a small room they are like made comfortably for the
pupils and the teachers also they must have seats made of wood and painted also
they must be clean and orderly they must be like a tin roof later like grass on top
to give shade also they use them so that it will stay cool be very comfortable in the
schools because they like they ways the schools are also the schools are made of
mud and remain a bit rough The . . .)

Note that Elena selected the topic because it was of interest to her, and she
revealed some prior knowledge of the topic. For example, she discussed how a
building may be adapted to changes in climate and possibly assumed that the ma­
terials used in construction may be indigenous to Puerto Rico’s tropical region.
Elena may also be using her own knowledge of adobe construction in Tucson and
Mexico to guess about how schools are constructed in Ponce. An analysis of Elena’s
writing shows that her intent was to write an informational piece of writing. She
begins with the statement “Las escuelas an decer . . . ” (The schools must be ... ;
Las escuelas han de ser), indicating with this opening that the text will inform about
the topic of schools. The text is also not in the form of an outline, list, or story but
in a narrative paragraph similar to those found in content-area textbooks. It appears
that Elena is aware of or borrowing from a textbook organizational structure. Text­
books organize content into groups of sentences that inform about a particular con­
cept. Once that concept has been explained, a new concept is described with a new
group of sentences delineated by a paragraph. Elena attempted to do the same,
although she did not utilize new paragraphs to begin new concept descriptions.
Perhaps what is most noticeable in the text is Elena’s spelling and lack of punc­
tuation. Elena spelled phonetically, the way words sounded, and used no conven­
tional punctuation. Yet, in parts of the text her ideas flowed, and she used words
that indicated the connection between her thoughts. For example, she used “tam­
bién” (también; also) instead of punctuation to inform the reader that one sentence
had ended and another had begun. When her description changed from the interior
to the exterior of the classroom, she did not use any punctuation but again used the
word “también” to connect her sentences conceptually and provide the text with
some semantic coherence. By focusing on these surface difficulties in her writing,
however, difficulties that can be corrected with instruction, we may underestimate
greatly what Elena is capable of doing with print.
Extending beyond the classroom. After her first writing Elena decided she wanted
to develop a video about Tucson to send to the students in Puerto Rico. In devel­
oping ideas for the video, she interviewed her father about Tucson, and together

L. C. M o l l a n d J. B. G r e e n b e r g

332

IN's classroom

After-school lab

9 ff 9
Elena's activities

T eícher-researcher
(Demonstration lessons)

study groups

Extending the module
Video production : 1
writing, interviewing

6 weeks
Code:
1 - Parents
2-Lab staff
3-Theoretical articles
4-Teachers
5-Peers

6-Community organizations (e.g., Museum)
7-Students
8-Library /resource materials
9-Classroom in Ponce
10-School community

Figure 14.1. The classroom’s social networks

they looked in encyclopedias for suggestions. They also contacted an aunt who had
been a longtime resident of Tucson to obtain additional information about the city.
This research, we should mention again, was self-initiated, not assigned by the
instructor. This extension of the literacy activity beyond the classroom was also not
unique to Elena; it formed part of the general structure of the module. Figure 14.1
depicts the various social networks that formed part of the study groups and the
after-school lab. Also included in the figure are the specific social relations Elena
used in developing her activities. These social relations represent resources, new
means to accomplish the goals of her project, that are not usually found or used in
classroom instruction. Here we highlight what Elena wrote at home with her fa­

Creating zones of possibilities

333

ther’s assistance. She decided to visit a local museum and depict its content as part
of a video documentary:
ir al museo con una già para que me enseñe esplique lo que significa cada cosa y
que mediga más o menos cuando hicieron cada cosa y ir apuntando lo que me va
diciendo la già de cada cosa asi les doy enformasion a los niños de Puerto Rico
para que vean como hera antes Tucson Arizona y enseñar como se vestían los
indios que vivían en Tucson. Como eran las camas, y las casas donde vivían.
Enseñar que hacían las casas de soquete y que aun esiste una casa hecha por los
indios y de soquete eso creo que les va a interesar a los niños de Puerto Rico como
de mi hedad porque ami me interesa mucho saber del tiempo pasado como vivían
y lo que usaban para vivir que comían y como hacían las casas de soquete para que
no se cayera enseñar la cosas que hay en la cosina como las piedras donde molían
la comida y la estufa de dos placas. Y el baño la vañera era una bandejas y había
la ropa como votas y camisas pantalones de cuero que se ponían los indios nativos
y sus maletas. La sala era como tenia unos muebles de madera y unos libreros y en
medio abia una alfombra muy antigua tejida (E.O., 5/4/89)
(go to the museum with a guide so that he can show explain to me what each thing
signifies and tell me more or less when each thing was made and write down each
thing the guide tells me that way I can give information to the children from Puerto
Rico so that they can see how Tucson Arizona used to be and show how the Indians
that lived in Tucson used to dress. How the beds were, and the houses where they
lived. Show that they made their houses from mud and that even now there exists
a house made by the Indians and from mud that I think will interest the children
from Puerto Rico about my age because I am very interested in knowing about
times past how did they live and what they used to live what did they eat and how
did they make the mud houses so that they wouldn’t fall show the things that there
are in the kitchen like the stoves where they ground food and the two burner stove.
And the bathroom the bathtub was some pans and there was the clothes like boots
and shirts suede pants which the native Indians wore and their suitcases. The living
room had some wooden furniture and some bookshelves and in the middle there
was a very old knitted rug)

The text seems to take the form of a list of ideas that Elena’s father may have
shared with her. Elena recognizes that there is no need to write a complete narrative
because the рифове of the text is to provide suggestions to herself and a plan of
action during her upcoming video sessions. What is most interesting is that Elena
used the text to communicate with herself, to regulate her own behavior, to plan
her activities. For example, she starts the list by directing herself, as the reader,
through each step of the tour, beginning with a general statement about the mu­
seum, then progressing through each room. She’s also very conscious of her audi­
ence, specifying what type of information she thinks the children in Puerto Rico,
her eventual audience, will find interesting and why. Along with the detailed de­
scription, Elena prepared a storyboard for the videotaping. The storyboard consists
of step-by-step video instructions and corresponding audio segments accompanying
the video. Elena even drew sketches of what the camera should be focusing on and
underneath each sketch wrote a brief description of what she would say.
It is also evident that Elena’s spelling improved, which may be because of her

334

L. C. M o l l a n d J. B. G r e e n b e r g

father’s help. In contrast to her previous writing, she also begins to use some punc­
tuation, for example, periods at the end of some sentences and capital letters at the
beginning of sentences. The text, for its purposes, has unity and hangs together
coherently; it is grammatical despite the lack of conventional punctuation. This is
not to say she does not need assistance with the conventions for writing, such as
punctuation, which would enhance the communicative power of her writing. But
this assistance can be provided by the instructor or a more capable peer in the
context of using writing for communication.
Video preparation. Preparation of the video was a major undertaking. Elena had
carefully planned the visit and written questions to ask the tour guide, the expert on
the site. Elena chose the Fremont House as her site, one of the first and few remain­
ing homes still standing in one of Tucson’s original barrios. The house is now a
museum that contains many artifacts of its time. She chose the date to go to the
museum and film her video and asked others to do the videotaping while she inter­
viewed the guide and toured the historical site. Elena produced this final writing
sample as an outline to guide the sequences of her video:
Boy a presentar al già para ve si me ayuda
Boy a decir de que vamos hablar durante la pelicula
Despues boy a entrar ala casa y empesar a esplicar cada cosa
Enseñar las recamaras con todo adentro
Enseñar las armas que usaban para matar animales
Enseñar la cosina con la mesa, las sillas y las estufas
(E.O., 5/10/89)
(I will introduce the guide to see if he will help me
I will say what we are going to talk about during the film
Afterward I will enter the house and begin explaining each thing
Show the bedrooms with everything inside
Show the arms which they used to kill the animals
Show the kitchen with the table, the chairs and the stoves)

Armed with her plans and outlines, Elena was very confident throughout the
videotaping and interview. Her questions were well thought out and clear. For ex­
ample, she asked the guide what was done to protect the structure from erosion.
Although Elena encountered some obstacles in her interview - for example, the
guide was not compietely fluent in Spanish - she was undaunted by the experience
and completed, through her own volition, the task she set for herself at the begin­
ning of the module.
Despite the brief writing sample, we can detect improvements in spelling and
vocabulary. For example, Elena is using the aspirated h (as in hablar, speak) and
does not overgeneralize by using it with words such as empezar (to begin) and
enseñar (to teach) as she did in her previous writing. For an outline, her sentences
are well designed and grammatically acceptable, and her description of events is
coherent and clear. But what is impressive is Elena’s use of writing over the course
of the module to help her think, plan, conduct, and successfully complete her activ-

Creating zones of possibilities

335

ity. She went from a tentative, reluctant writer to a student who used writing to
accomplish her intellectual goals.
It seems obvious that Elena has already internalized the actions and knowledge
to participate fruitfully in a creative activity and to use literacy not only to com­
municate with others but to communicate with herself - to mediate and regulate her
own actions. We are not claiming she developed these abilities working in our
module; she probably already had this literate capacity. However, we created the
supportive circumstances and facilitated the resources and tools, the new means,
that allowed her to display her competence. We created a zone of proximal devel­
opment that led to the student’s utilization of social resources to accomplish her
goals. Elena’s displaying what she knew provided us, and the teacher, with a good
indication of what Vygotsky called the child’s potential for instruction; in this in­
stance, the child’s potential to benefit from instruction that is more complex and
challenging than what she is currently offered. These opportunities to observe stu­
dents “showing off” what they can do with print are rare in classrooms as presently
organized, especially if the students are working-class and Spanish-speaking (but
see Moll, 1988). These students, and their teachers, are provided with little room
to maneuver or to deviate from the standard curriculum. How can we organize
lessons to facilitate for these children continuous or multiple displays of compe­
tence? How can teachers and students take maximum advantage of existing social
resources to reorganize instruction? The second case study addresses these issues.

The second case study
One of the initial activities in the lab centered around construction and building, a
theme of interest to the students. Construction, it also turns out, is one of the most
prominent funds of knowledge found in the homes. We, therefore, viewed this
“construction module” as an important opportunity to extend our ideas about inte­
grating home and school knowledge. We started the work by showing the students
slides of a group of men constructing a home in rural Mexico, as a way of eliciting
their comments on the building process. We also asked the children to develop
models of buildings or houses and provided them with wood, paper, and other
materials with which to construct.
One of the teachers who attended the lab, Ina A. (a pseudonym), decided she
wanted to develop a similar construction module in her classroom.6 Ina teaches
sixth grade in a bilingual program; she has approximately 30 students in her class,
and they are predominantly Spanish-dominant, Mexican children. Along with an­
other teacher, she is responsible for Spanish reading for the intermediate students
in her school. This is Ina’s fourth year of teaching. She is a native of Mexico and
has been living in the Tucson area for approximately 5 years.
Although Ina followed the assigned curriculum, she deviated often to implement
supplementary activities. For example, she used the assigned basal reader but sup­
plemented it with novels, newspaper and magazine stories, and poems. She also

L. C. M o l l a n d J. B. G r e e n b e r g

336

After-school lab

Classroom

Implementation

Teacher's research and planning

Use of libraries &
district media center

Funds of knowledge &
comm, participation

Professional meetings
& inservices

Construction modulo
model building
eading , writing ,math
Extending

the module

Modeling a city :
planning, regulations
Genera lization
Biographical writing Λ
Formal interviews, »compare generation^/

t

Career development
community visits
Figure 14.2. The construction module

had the class write often, including poems, short stories, narratives, and descrip­
tions, but reported that the children were reluctant writers, not an unusual situation.
The teacher started her module sharing our belief that the use of outside, community
resources could give more meaning to the learning experiences of the students. She
mentioned that the “parents and children will see the role of the community [in
education] as something that is worthwhile.” She was concerned with how parents
perceived the school and believed that parents felt that they didn’t belong. How­
ever, she also believed that parents were interested and willing to help. The module
and its extensions are depicted graphically in Figure 14.2. We will discuss its de­
velopment, highlighting the use of social resources for teaching and learning.
Beginning. The teacher introduced the idea of the construction module to the class
and discussed with the students possibilities for research on this topic. The students

Creating zones of possibilities

337

accepted the idea of the new research. The teacher believed, however, that the work
required to conduct the module would be more in-depth and extensive than anything
they had done before. For the teacher, the module clearly represented a new chal­
lenge for her and for the students.
After introducing and clarifying the idea of the module, the teacher asked the
students to visit the library and start locating information on building or construc­
tion. In particular, the students obtained materials on the history of dwellings and
on different ways of constructing structures. Through her own research in a com­
munity library and in the school district’s media center (see Figure 14.2), the teacher
identified a series of books on construction and on different professions, including
volumes on architects and carpenters, and decided to use them as part of the mod­
ule. The initial module was successful. The students followed their library research
by building a model house or other structure as homework and wrote brief essays
describing their research and explaining their construction. The students wrote in
different ways. Some described in detail how they built the model; two students
collaborated on a story based on the details of their model, inventing a character
named Maria, whose father constructs houses:
La casa de María está en un pueblo lejano y está hecha por su padre. La casa de
María tiene dos cuartos un cuarto para su mamá y papá. El otro de azul es de ella.
Su cuarto no tiene nada ni de sus padres. La sala tiene dos sillones y una mesita en
el medio. El baño es chico y es ancho no es lujoso lo unico lujoso es un espejo
chico. La cocina tiene una estufa poco lujosa y tiene una mesa. La casa fue hecha
de troncos de árboles muy buenos y bonitos. María y su familia están contentos en
su casa tienen dos cuartos, un baño, la sala y la cocina. También tienen electricidad
gas y agua. Por fuera de la casa esta lujoso y bonito. Tiene un río tres árboles con
piedritas alrededor. Ellos tienen poco dinero pero su papá trabaja haciendo casas.
Asi que viven bien. A nosotros nos gusto la cocina, la sala, las camitas, los árbolitos y nos gusto como la hicimo estuvimos una hora haciendo la casita. Nos gusto
y aprobechamos el tiempo que estuvimos haciéndola. Nosotros creemos que ust­
edes también aprobecharon su tiempo en la de ustedes. Fin.
(Maria’s house is in a far away town and was made by her father. Maria’s house
has two rooms a room for her mom and dad. The other blue one is hers. Her room
has nothing nor her parents’. The living room has two couches and a small table in
the middle. The bathroom is small and is wide it is not luxurious the only luxurious
thing is a small mirror. The kitchen has a stove lacking in luxury and has a table.
The house was made from very good and pretty tree trunks. Maria and her family
are happy in their house they have two rooms, a bathroom, the living room and the
kitchen. They also have electricity gas and water. On the outside the house is
luxurious and pretty. It has a river three trees with little rocks around them. They
have little money but her dad works making houses. So they live well. We liked
the kitchen, the living room, the little beds, the little trees and we liked how we
made it we spent an hour making the little house. We like it and we made good
use of the time that we spent building it. We believe that you all also made good
use of your time in making yours. End.)

Another student compared his model to the human body; note the use of meta­
phors and precise construction terms, such as hormigón armado (reinforced con­
crete).
Sin barillas, no podrías mantener en pie una casa. Caerías al suelo como una
mareoneta sin hilos que la sostenga. Una casa sin esqueleto se caería del mismo

338

L. C. M o l l a n d J. B. G r e e n b e r g
modo. Sin embargo, ei esqueleto de una casa no esta constituido por huesos como
los nuestros, Sino por hormigón armado. Para Construir una casa necesitas, antes
que nada, hacer los cimientos, es decir, una sólida base de hormigón. Sobre ésta
se levanta el esqueleto de la casa y lia está construida. Nosotros utilisamos carton
goma y picadientes para hacer una casita primero estábamos pegando los puros
picadientes y se caían entonces decidimos ponerle carton y luego le pegamos los
picadientes y no se cayo.
(Without steel rods, you couldn’t maintain a house upright. It would fall to the
ground like a puppet without strings to sustain it. A house without a frame would
fall the same way. Nevertheless, the frame [esqueleto, skeleton] of a house is not
constituted by bones like ours, but by reinforced steel. To construct a house one
needs, first of all, to make the foundations, that is to say, a solid base of reinforced
steel. On top of this the frame is built and now it is constructed. We utilized
cardboard glue and toothpicks to make the little house we were first glueing only
the toothpicks and they would fall then we decided to add carton and then we glued
the toothpicks and it did not fall.)

In short, the teacher was able to get the students to write about their experiences
and in the process improved the activities she learned at the lab.
Mobilizing funds of knowledge. The teacher, however, did not stop there; she ex­
tended the module beyond what we had accomplished in the lab. The teacher pro­
posed to the class inviting parents as experts to provide information on specific
aspects of construction and mentioned that she had already invited one father, a
mason, to describe his work. She was particularly interested in having the father
describe his use of construction instruments and tools and tell how he estimated or
measured the area or perimeter of the location in which he works. The teacher
reported that the children were surprised by the thought of inviting their parents as
experts, especially given some of the parents’ lack of formal schooling, and were
intrigued by the idea.
The visit by the first parent was a key to the module. Neither the teacher nor the
students were sure what to expect. The teacher described it as follows:
The first experience was a total success. . . . We received two parents. The first
one, Mr. S., father of one of my students, works at [the school district] building
portable classrooms. He built his own house, and he helped my student do his
project. He explained to the students the basic details of construction. For example,
he explained about the foundation of a house, the way they need to measure the
columns, how to find the perimeter or area. . . . After his visit, the children wrote
what they learned about this topic. It was interesting to see how each one of them
learned something different: e.g., the vocabulary of construction, names of tools,
economic concerns, and the importance of knowing mathematics in construction.
Building on her initial success, the teacher invited other parents or relatives to
make their expertise available to the class. We quote again from the teacher’s notes:
The next parent was Mr. T. He was not related to any of the students. He is part
of the community and a construction worker. His visit was also very interesting.
He was nervous and a little embarrassed, but after a while he seemed more relaxed.
The children asked him a great number of questions. They wanted to know how to
make the mix to put together bricks. ... He explained the process and the children

Creating zones of possibilities

339

were able to see the need for understanding fractions in mathematics because he
gave the quantities in fractions. They also wanted to know how to build arches. He
explained the process of building arches through a diagram on the board, and told
the students that this was the work of engineers.

The teacher also invited people she knew to contribute to the class. What is
important is that the teacher invited parents and others in the community to contrib­
ute substantively to the development of lessons, to access their funds of knowledge
for academic purposes. Theirs was an intellectual contribution to the content and
process of classroom learning. The parents came to share their knowledge, exper­
tise, or experiences with the students. This knowledge, in turn, became part of the
students’ work or a focus of analysis, as illustrated eloquently in the following
English writing sample from one of the girls in the class:
Mr. S. came today and in a way he taught us how to build a house. He taught
us how to measure for the materials and which materials we needed and how to get
the best only. He also taught us that if you buy an expensive house from a company
it may be made from real cheap stuff and just maybe it might fall apart. And that
if you build a house without a ridge or varillas it may tip over and just fall apart.
When you are putting the ridge you must put an joist hanger or the ridge will fall.
Also you must put cement first then you put in the varillas. For the wall the ply­
wood fir is better than the waffle board. But the waffle board is cheaper than ply­
wood fir. And that for the door and the window you put a metal board for it could
hold the material or blocks. He also said that if you paid another worker that isn’t
from the company he might cheat you, like tell you to pay by the hour. And then
they’ll take a long time. So then you have to pay them more because they worked
more hours. If you do it yourself you might save, I said you might because if you
don’t know you will be wasting a lot of money because will not be knowing what
you are doing . . . and if you are paying the worker how much both of you decided
they might do it real fast. He also said that you’ll need to put at least 3 or 4 feet of
cement above the ground so that termites do not go in. And that the bottom of the
plywood or what ever you are using people put some termite poison. But well it is
better to have a brick house and to build it yourself because you might save a lot
of money.
If you do not know how to make your own home or just a storage room like
Mr. S. you might want a friend to help. You should also know the size or amount
of the wood, bricks, nails, or any other supply that you might need so that you
don’t spend a fortune or a lot of money on some dum storage room that you didn’t
even do right and that in a week it’ll fall down.
So if you are wanting a house or just a room make sure you know what you're
doing. Take my advise I listened to someone who does know. Don’t try to do it
yourself because you’ll probably end up with nothing because it’ll probably fall.
He also showed the size of some nails and other supplies.

Another girl wrote, although in less detail, about the same visit, and the visitor
happened to be her uncle.
My tio Mr. S. came to our class to talk about the facts of house making. My tio
is a carpenter. He told us about how some people are Honest and some people are
not Honest. Most honest people are like your family and friends. After you put
some bricks you put fiber glass and then put tirmite liquet and then some serock.
My tio said its better to build a house out of brick instead of wood. There are some
word he told us I only remember is Ridge, Fiber glass, Stager, Bolts, Joist Hanger,

340

L. C.

Moll

and

J. B.

Greenberg

Ina's Classroom

's

Use of libraries &
district media center

♦i Construction module

Extending the module

4 weeks

Modeling a city :
planning, regulations Г

Г

Generalization
Biographical writing \
Formal interviews, |
compare generations/

Code :
1 -Students1 own knowledge
2-Students' parents & relatives
5-Other students' parents or relatives
4-Teacher’s own network

Career development V
community visits Г

5-School & district staff
6-Community members
7-University faculty S, students

Figure 14.3. Social networks for teaching

Serock, plywood, waffle board, and panel. The elictricion and pluming gos threw
the bottom of the ground, these days houses are made easy and cheap. I think it is
better to make a house out of brick.

Obviously, these visits were not trivial; they mattered for the development of the
lessons. As such, these invitations and classroom visits helped create a new instruc­
tional routine in this classroom, which helped the teacher and students exceed the
curriculum, stretch the limits of their writing, and expand the knowledge that formed
lessons. Figure 14.3 illustrates this mobilization of funds of knowledge through the
creation of social networks for teaching. In total, about 20 people visited the class­
room during the module implementation. The teacher utilized at least seven differ­
ent sources of funds of knowledge, listed below.

Creating zones of possibilities

341

1. The students’ own
knowledge: The first step in the module activities was for the
students to discuss
and present what they knew about the topic and to visit the
library to search for written sources that would help them elaborate their knowl­
edge.
2. The students’ parents and relatives: The first visitor to the classroom was one of
the students’ parents, and in subsequent activities the parents became a regular
source of information and assistance with the academic tasks.
3. Other students’ parents or relatives: The teacher also invited parents of students not
in her class, thus extending beyond her classroom the immediate network of knowl­
edge available to her and to the students.
4. The teacher’s own
network: In extending the module the teacher used her own
social network as a
resource of knowledge, inviting relatives and friends to partic­
ipate in the lessons.
5. School staff and teachers: The teacher also used the expertise of others in the
school, including teachers and other staff.
6. Community members without school-age children: The teacher also invited other
members of the surrounding community who were not necessarily part of the chil­
dren’s or her immediate social network.
7. University faculty and students: This group includes the lab staff and other univer­
sity personnel.

As we will show next, these social networks became a regular feature of classroom
instruction.
Extending the module. Establishing social networks to access funds of knowledge
for academic learning generated important secondary activities in this classroom
that went far beyond the initial module. For example, the class invited the brother
of one of the students, who was studying to be a draftsman, to present construction
plans to the class and explain how he developed them. Stimulated by the presenta­
tion, the students decided to extend the module by going beyond the building of
individual structures and combining them to form a community. But developing a
community with its streets, services, parks, and private and public buildings re­
quired considerable research. The students and the teacher followed two strategies:
They returned to the library to do research, acquiring additional information on
what a town or city requires for its development, for example, obtaining water and
providing electricity. To supplement the library research, the students conducted
observations in their own communities to determine what other aspects of urban life
they might need to incorporate into their model. The teacher provided the class with
a large poster of a town, which she found during her own research, and the students
placed it on the side wall of the classroom, near their models. As was now a routine,
part of the classroom task, the students presented their research in writing and shared
it orally with the class or with others in the school. Consider the following example:
There are many people that work in construction. First there is a designer. She
designs the way the inside of the building will look like. She finds the best quality
furniture to match the color of the room, she also gets the rugs, curtains etc. to
match the color. The architecture designs the building. He must figure out the
length, width and how many rooms there will be.
The estimators figures out how much everything will cost, he tries to find the

342

L. C. M o l l a n d J. B. G r e e n b e r g
best, least expensive tools for the job. he also has to extimate how long will it take
to finish, because every day they must pay money.
The carpenter does all the wood work. He designs all the wood work. He designs
the frame to start the building. He also does sticks so when they pour the concret
it is straight. The electrician puts the wires inside the walls for electricity, he also
does the outlets for connecting things, to have lights and other needs.
The plumber is someone who does drains. He does bathroom wires and he puts
a hose like, so that water can come out of a fountain.

An important consequence of the module was the way it shaped the students’ and
the teacher’s perception of the parents and the community in general. In a sense,
the teacher convinced herself that valuable knowledge exists beyond the classroom
and that it could be mobilized for academic learning. She also understood that
teaching through the community, as represented by the people in the various social
networks and their collective funds of knowledge, could become part of the class­
room routine, that is, part of the “core” curriculum. We describe next this gener­
alization of the activities into the curriculum.

Generalization, The two activities we describe below were developed by the teacher
and students, independent of our assistance. As such, they represent a generaliza­
tion of the construction module activities into the curriculum. This is a key point.
The module started as a temporary and supplementary activity, but as the teacher
extended the module, it became more central to the classroom’s activities, a vehicle
to accomplish the teacher’s curricular goals. The teacher generalized the module by
incorporating the core curriculum within the module’s activities. This generaliza­
tion illustrates the extent to which the teacher and her class had taken over, appro­
priated, in the Vygotskian sense, the initial module’s activities and created some­
thing new to address the needs of this specific classroom. An example will illustrate
this process of appropriation.
The teacher had attended an in-service on writing and was provided with a pack­
age of materials on possible writing activities. She noticed that one of the activities
concerned writing biographies and deliberately chose this topic as a theme to rein­
force the instructional process involving funds of knowledge which the class had
started with the construction module. The logic of developing this new module is
what is of interest here. It depicts how the teacher re-created her own version of the
module and suggests the way she was acquiring ownership of the procedures and
goals of the activity. What follows is the sequence of the module’s activities:
1. The goal of the activity was for the students to write a biography. The procedures
included the students’ writing about the lives of people from different generations.
The study materials included questions about people’s activities as children, a topic
that particularly interested the students. The teacher used the available languagearts materials to train the children in how to interview others. The students also
started to identify whom they wanted to invite to the classroom for the class to
interview and persons they could interview outside the classroom.
2. As an extension of the materials, the students developed questions in Spanish and
English that they could ask the interview subjects, among them questions about

Creating zones of possibilities

343

different jobs that people had done. This topic had become quite salient in the
previous module, when the students analyzed the division of labor that goes into
constructing a building. The topic is also related to the identification of people’s or
households’ funds of knowledge.
3. The teacher and the students invited people from three different generations, rep­
resenting the decades of the 1940s, 1960s, and 1970s. The teacher discussed with
those invited the types of questions they could expect the students to ask.
4. During a 4-week period, a total of 12 people visited the class. These people were
identified and contacted through the social networks previously discussed (see Fig­
ure 14.3). In this instance, the class drew people from all of the sources available
to them. The children interviewed the people in both Spanish and English.
5. The students wrote summaries of the interviews, highlighting specific questions or
areas of interest to them.
6. The students were then asked to interview two other people in the community who
represented two different generations and to write a comparison based on their
interviews.
7. Finally, the students brought pictures from their families depicting different gen­
erations. These pictures were discussed in class and posted on the front board as a
symbol of the students’ research and the theme of study.

This process represents how the teacher reapplied in her instructional practice the
principles that guide the activities of the lab, and she was able to do so indepen­
dently, without our assistance. She picked a theme that was significant to the chil­
dren and helpful to her in achieving the curricular goals. She also adjusted the
packaged curriculum to include funds of knowledge not available within the class­
room. This incorporation of funds of knowledge was accomplished by bringing into
the classroom community people who could be reached through the available social
networks, but the teacher also used homework assignments to tap the funds of
knowledge of the students’ homes and other locations.
All of the activities, from the planning and interviewing to the preparation of a
final product, involved considerable reading and writing in both languages on the
part of the students. As the students’ writing samples suggest, literacy in English
and Spanish occurred as a means of analysis and expression, not as isolated reading
and writing exercises. To support the development of writing, and to enable indi­
vidual assessments, the teacher organized peer-editing groups that focused on how
to improve the writing to facilitate the clear expression of ideas, whether in English
or Spanish. The teacher evaluated the students’ progress by their ability to deal with
new and more complex activities, and by their ability to read and produce more
sophisticated writing to accomplish those activities. As Langer (1987) has sug­
gested, it is necessary
to look for successful literacy learning not in isolated bits of knowledge, but in
students’ growing ability to use language and literacy in more and broader activi­
ties. It will also be necessary to judge progress in learning by students’ ability to
successfully complete those activities. When we do this, the nature of instructional
activities will change dramatically - from pretend to real tasks, from parts to wholes,
from practice to doing, and from recitation to thinking, (p. 17)

Following this module, the teacher organized yet another module, this time coinciding with the end of the school year - on career development. The topic

344

L. C. M o l l a n d J. B. G r e e n b e r g

evolved from the children’s questions and work during the previous modules, as
they came into contact with diverse jobs and family labor histories. Their guiding
question was: What do you see in your future? Next to the board displaying the
family pictures, the students and teachers developed posters depicting various jobs
and professions. Through the social networks, they invited high school and univer­
sity teachers and students to discuss various careers and how to enter them. They
also visited local schools and interacted with professors and students. As with other
modules, the children used their reading and writing to mediate and analyze their
interactions with the “living knowledge” brought into the classroom by their social
networks or encountered in the community during their visits.

Discussion
“For Vygotsky,” Bakhurst (1986) has suggested, “the identity of psychology as a
science depended on the degree to which it could contribute to the transformation
of the object it investigates. Its task was not simply to mirror but to harness reality”
(pp. 122-123, italics in original). It is this “harnessing” of social resources for the
transformation of teaching and learning that is the essence of our project. Our analy­
sis shows that families control their resources through social relations that connect
households to each other and facilitate, among other functions, the transmission of
knowledge among participants. We have termed these diverse, socially mediated
transactions the exchange of funds of knowledge. It is how these social systems of
knowledge operate - these extended zones of proximal development - that has
attracted our attention. These social relations of exchange are multistranded and
flexible in that they involve many people and can be arranged or rearranged de­
pending on the specific needs of the participants. These exchanges are also recip­
rocal. It is this reciprocity that establishes and maintains the necessary trust among
participants to keep the system active and useful.
We have come to think of both the content and process of exchange of funds of
knowledge as enormously useful in mediating instruction. Our claim is that by
developing social networks that connect classrooms to outside resources, by mobi­
lizing funds of knowledge, we can transform classrooms into more advanced con­
texts for teaching and learning. The first case study showed that by developing units
of study that connect literacy to the social world teachers can provide students with
practice in a wide range of oral and written language uses. The study featured the
work of a girl who was very reluctant to participate in class. Through the activities
that formed part of the module, activities she initiated, she actively created her own
learning situations by involving her father in the research, visiting a local historical
site, producing a videotape, and interviewing a tour guide. These activities, in turn,
created many opportunities to write and to use writing to guide her thinking. Re­
gardless of the limitations in the writing of any specific student, teachers can de­
velop many circumstances within which to assess students’ strengths and weak­
nesses and within which to provide instruction to develop their writing.

Creating zones of possibilities

345

The second case study shifted the analysis from an individual lesson and showed
how a teacher changed her classroom from a relatively self-contained entity, as is
the case with most classrooms, with little or no interaction with the outside world
into a classroom whose learning activities were enhanced by the participation of
community members. Through the development of social networks for teaching,
the teacher facilitated the intellectual contribution of parents and other adults to
academic lessons. This parental participation, in turn, provided the teacher and
students not only with an appreciation of the knowledge of the parents but with an
additional context for learning. As with the households, the key to these networks
was their reciprocity. Parents and other persons readily agreed to contribute to les­
sons because of the implicit assumption that the students would benefit academi­
cally. These networks could not be sustained if the parents, teachers, or students
believed them to be educationally insignificant. For most classrooms, this infusion
of funds of knowledge would mean reorganizing the context of literacy instruction
from a passive recitation model to an interactive, more holistic approach that would
make full use of student and parental experiences. To be successful, the introduc­
tion of funds of knowledge into the classroom must facilitate the development of
new, more advanced literacy activities for the students.
In both case studies, we refrained from imposing a curriculum on teachers; that
is a recipe for failure. Instead, we worked collaboratively with teachers and built
on their needs or interests. In our first case study, the teachers were motivated by
their concerns about the students’ writing. We found they needed considerable sup­
port before they began experimenting with instruction. The formation of study groups
as part of the after-school lab greatly facilitated these teachers’ participation in the
project by creating a setting where they could think, question their own teaching,
plan activities, and address practical concerns. The teacher in the second case study
was motivated to develop new activities in her classroom and willing to re-create
and extend in her class the module she observed in the lab. That she was already
testing the limits of her curriculum by including in her classroom supplementary
activities facilitated implementing the innovation. Her efforts show that teachers
can develop literacy activities that exceed in sophistication, intellectual level, and
scope what is currently being taught in schools.
Vygotsky (1987) wrote that in “receiving instruction in a system of knowledge,
the child learns of things that are not before his eyes, things that far exceed the
limits of his actual and even potential immediate experience” (p. 180). We hardly
believe that rote instruction of low-level skills is the system of knowledge that
Vygotsky had in mind. We perceive the students’ community, and its funds of
knowledge, as the most important resource for reorganizing instruction in ways that
“far exceed” the limits of current schooling. An indispensable element of our ap­
proach is the creation of meaningful connections between academic and social life
through the concrete learning activities of the students. We are convinced that teachers
can establish, in systemic ways, the necessary social relations outside classrooms
that will change and improve what occurs within the classroom walls. These social

346

L. C. M o l l a n d J. B. G r e e n b e r g

connections help teachers and students to develop their awareness of how they can
use the everyday to understand classroom content and use classroom activities to
understand social reality.

Notes
1 A total of 35 families are participating in the household study. All are families of fourth-graders
(bilingual classrooms) participating in the implementing and comparison schools of our project,
except for 6 families of fifth- and sixth-grade children participating in the after-school lab. Our goal
was to sample families as follows: 10 students from the “treatment” classroom who also participate
in the lab; 10 students from the “treatment” classroom who do not participate in the lab; 10 students
from the comparison classroom. Attrition has forced us to modify our sample to include fifth- and
sixth-graders. However, the distribution of students representing the treatment and comparison class­
rooms remains faithful to the original design. We are currently recruiting additional families into the
study. Our thanks to our colleagues, Carlos Vêlez, Gerardo Bemache, Javier Tapia, and Claudina
Cabrera, all of the Bureau of Applied Research in Anthropology, University of Arizona, who have
conducted most of the participant observations in the households and helped to elaborate the analysis
presented herein. The project is funded by a contract from the Office of Bilingual Education and
Minority Language Affairs, Department of Education, Washington, DC, as part of the Innovative
Approaches Research Project, directed by Charlene Rivera, Development Associates, Inc.
2 Following Vélez-Ibáñez (1988), we are using the term Mexican to designate native-born of Mexico
as well as those of Mexican parentage bom in the United States. This designation is also consistent
with the self-descriptions of the persons, regardless of generation, in our study sample. The present
study builds directly on our previous work addressing social and educational issues of Latino families
and students (see, e.g., Moll, 1988; Moll & S. Diaz, 1987; Vélez-lbáñez, 1983a, 1988a).
3 Kathy Whitmore conducted these observations.
4 Rosi Andrade and Elizabeth Saavedra, in collaboration with the teachers, developed this case study
and were the instructors in the examples described here. They also helped develop the analysis
presented in this chapter.
5 As part of the lab’s activities, we communicated by computer with students in Ponce, Puerto Rico,
San Diego, California, and New York City. These written communications were conducted in both
English and Spanish. Our thanks to Dennis Sayers and Project Orillas for facilitating the link-up with
Puerto Rico and New York.
6 Arminda Fuentevilla and Hilda Angiulo helped develop the analysis presented herein.

References
Aguilar, J. (1984). Trust and exchange; Expressive and instrumental dimensions of reciprocity in a
peasant community. Ethos, /2(1), 3-29.
Anyon, J. (1980). Social class and the hidden curriculum of work. Journal of Education, /62(1), 6792.
Bakhurst, D. J. (1986). Thought, speech, and the genesis of meaning; On the 50th anniversary of
Vygotsky’s Myslenie i Ree’ [Speech and thinking]. Studies in Soviet thought, 31, 102-129.
Berliner, D. C. (1985). Laboratory settings and the study of teacher education. Journal of Teacher
Education, 36(6), 2-8.
Davydov, V. V. (1988). Learning activity: The main problems needing further research. Multidiscipli­
nary Newsletter for Activity Theory, /(1—2), 29-36.
Goodlad, J. (1984). A place called school. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Greenberg, J. B. (1984). Household economy and economic sector participation in Douglas, Arizona,
and Agua Prieta, Sonora. Unpublished manuscript.
Greenberg, J. B. (1989, April). Funds of knowledge: Historical constitution, social distribution, and
transmission. Paper presented at the annual meetings of the Society for Applied Anthropology,
Santa Fe, NM.

Creating zones of possibilities

347

Greenfield, P., & Lave, J. (1982). Cognitive aspects of informal education. In D. Wagner & H. Steven­
son (Eds.), Cultural perspectives on child development (pp. 181-207). San Francisco: Freeman.
Heath, S. B. (1983). Ways with words: Language, life, and work in communities and classrooms.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Laboratory of Comparative Human Cognition. (1982). A model system for the study of learning diffi­
culties. Quarterly Newsletter of the Laboratory of Comparative Human Cognition, 4(3), 39-66.
Laboratory of Comparative Human Cognition. (1986). The contributions of cross-cultural research to
educational practice. American Psychologist, 4/(10), 1049-1058.
Langer, J. (1987). A sociocognitive perspective on literacy. In J. Langer (Ed.), Language, literacy, and
culture: Issues in society and schooling (pp. 1-20). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Langer, J., & Applebee, A. (1986). Reading and writing instruction: Toward a theory of teaching and
learning. In E. Z. Rothkopf (Ed.), Review of research in education (pp. 171-194). Washington,
DC: American Educational Research Association.
Langer, I., & Applebee, A. (1987). How writing shapes thinking: A study of teaching and learning
(NCTE Research Report No. 22). Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of English.
Lomnitz, L. (1977). Networks and marginality: Life in a Mexican shantytown. New York: Academic
Press.
Luria, A. R. (1982). Language and cognition. New York: Wiley.
Milardo, R. (Ed.) (1988). Families and social networks. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Moll, L. C. (1988). Key issues in teaching Latino students. Language Arts, 65(5), 465-472.
Moll, L. C. (1989). Teaching second-language students: A Vygotskian perspective. In D. Johnson &
D. Roen (Eds.), Richness in writing: Empowering ESL students (pp. 55-69). New York: Longman.
Moll, L. C., & Díaz, R. (1987). Teaching writing as communication: The use of ethnographic findings
in classroom practice (pp. 195-221). In D. Bloome (Ed.), Literacy and schooling (pp. 55-65).
Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Moll, L. C., & Díaz, S. (1987). Change as the goal of educational research. Anthropology and Educa­
tion Quarterly, 18(4), 300-311.
Moll, L.C., Vélez-lbáñez, C., & Greenberg, J. (1988). Project implementation plan. Community knowl­
edge and classroom practice: Combining resources for literacy instruction (Technical Report, De­
velopment Associates Subcontract No. L-10). Tucson: University of Arizona, College of Education
and Bureau of Applied Research in Anthropology.
Oakes, J. (1986). Tracking, inequality, and the rhetoric of school reform: Why schools don’t change.
Journal of Education, /6#, 61—80.
Stack, C. (1974). All our kin: Strategies for survival in a black community. New York: Harper Colo­
phon.
Trueba, H.T., & Delgado-Gaitán, C. (Eds.) (1988). School & society: Learning content through culture.
New York; Praeger.
Valsiner, J. (1988). Developmental psychology in the Soviet Union. Sussex: Harvester.
Vélez-lbáñez, C. G. (1983a). Bonds of mutual trust. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
Vélez-lbáñez, C. G. (1983b). Rituals of marginality. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Vélez-lbáñez, C. G. (1986). incorporating mechanisms of exchange among Mexicanos in the U.S.
borderlands. Paper presented at the Fourth Symposium of Mexican and United States Universities,
“One border: Two nations,’’ Sanie Fe, NM.
Vélez-lbáñez, C. G. (1988a). Networks of exchange among Mexicans in the U.S. and Mexico: Local
level mediating responses to national and international transformations. Urban Anthropology, /7(1),
27-51.
Vélez-lbáñez, C. G. (1988b, November). Forms and functions of funds of knowledge among Mexicans
in the southwest. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Anthropological Associa­
tion, Phoenix, AZ.
Vélez-lbáñez, C., Greenberg, J., & Johnstone, В. (1984). The ethnic, economic, and educational struc­
ture of Tucson, Arizona: The limits of possibility for the Mexican Americans in 1982. Proceedings
of the Meetings of the Rocky Mountain Council on Latin American Studies, /, 154-164.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1987). Speech and thinking. In L. S. Vygotsky, Collected Works (Vol. 1, pp. 39285) (R. Rieber & A. Carton, Eds.; N. Minick, Trans.). New York: Plenum.

348

L. C. M o l l a n d J. B. G r e e n b e r g

Weisner, T., & Gallimore, R. (1985, December). The convergence of ecocultural and activity theory.
Paper presented at the annual meetings of the American Psychological Association, Washington,
DC.
Wellman, B. (1985). Domestic work, paid work, and net work. In S. Duck & D. Pearman (Eds.),
Understanding personal relationships: An interdisciplinary approach (pp. 159-185). Beverly Hills,
CA: Sage.
Wolf, E. (1966). Peasants. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

