EDUCATIONAL PSYCHOLOGIST, 37(3/4), 191-206
Copyright © 1996, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Sociocultural Approaches to Learning and Development:
A Vygotskian Framework
Vera John-Steiner and Holbrook Mahn
University of New Mexico
Sociocultural approaches emphasize the interdependence of social and individual processes in
the coconstruction of knowledge. This article uses three central tenets of a Vygotskian
framework to examine the relation between learning and development: (a) social sources of
individual development, (b) semiotic (signs and symbols, including language) mediation in
human development, and (c) genetic (developmental) analysis. The role played by culture and
language in human development is an essential aspect of the Vygotskian framework and
provides an overarching theme for this article. The methodological foundation of this framework
is examined, particularly as it contrasts with other perspectives on the process of
internalization of social interaction in the construction of knowledge. The article concludes by
surveying sociocultural research on and applications to classroom learning and teaching,
particularly that which examines the role of collaboration.
It is significant that this special issue of Educational Psychologist
contains an article on sociocultural theory on the
centenary of the birth of its founder, the Russian psychologist
Lev Vygotsky. In the last few decades there has been increasing
interest in this theory and its implications for research on
classroom learning and teaching. There is a range of interpretations
and applications of sociocultural approaches, reflecting
the vitality of this perspective." Nevertheless, some common
assumptions of the sociocultural community have been
refined and clarified by contemporary scholars based on
Vygotsky’s original writings. A number of sources provide
overviews of these approaches and reflect the varied interpretations
of Vygotsky’s theory (Cole & Scribner, 1978; John-
Steiner & Souberman, 1978; van der Veer & Valsiner, 1991 ;
Wertsch, 1985, 1991).
To examine the central concepts of sociocultural theory,
the methodological foundations should be analyzed. The dialectical
method Vygotsky used differentiates it from other
perspectives presented in this issue. We focus on the differences
between social constructivist and sociocultural approaches
because these two perspectives are often associated,
resulting in confusion about their similarities and differences.
This article consists of three main sections: (a) a brief
overview of sociocultural approaches, (b) an examination of
sociocultural methodology, and (c) an overview of sociocultural
contributions to research and applications to classroom
learning and teaching. An overarching focus is the interdependence
of social and individual processes in the coconstruction
of knowledge. This focus clarifies the differences between
sociocultural theories based on Vygotsky’s
contributions and other perspectives reviewed in this issue.
Requests for reprints should be sent to Vera John-Steiner, Department of
Linguistics, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM 87131. E-mail:
vygotsky @ unm.edu
Vygotsky’s works have been studied and interpreted by a variety of
scholars, some of whom prefer to use the term cultural-historical. In this
article, we refer broadly to the legacy of Vygotsky’s work and the contributions
to and interpretations of his theory as the sociocultural approach. Of
particular significance in the various expansions of this framework are the
contributions of activity theorists, including Leontiev (1978) and Engeström
(1987, 1990). See the journal Mind, Culture, and Activity for the breadth of
disciplines and countries represented by contributors to the sociocultural
enterprise. Mind, Culture, and Activity is published four times a year by the
Laboratory of Comparative Human Cognition, University of California, San
Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0092. Fax: (619) 534-7746.
AN OVERVIEW OF SOCIOCULTURAL
THEORY
Sociocultural approaches to learning and development were
first systematized and applied by Vygotsky and his collaborators
in Russia in the 1920s and 1930s. They are based on
the concept that human activities take place in cultural contexts,
are mediated by language and other symbol systems,
and can be best understood when investigated in their historical
development. At a time when psychologists were intent
on developing simple explanations of human behavior, Vygotsky
developed a rich, multifaceted theory through which
192 JOHN-STEINER AND MAHN
he examined a range of subjects including the psychology of
art; language and thought; and learning and development,
including a focus on the education of students with special
needs. However, his work was suppressed for 20 years and did
not become accessible again until the late 1950s and early 1960s.
Since then, sociocultural approaches have gained increasing
recognition and have been further developed by scholars in over
a dozen countries. Contemporary interpretations and reinterpretations
of Vygotsky’s and his collaborators’ work reflect the
visibility and obscurity of this theory’s 60-year existence. The
expansions and interpretations in the last 25 years have led to
diverse perspectives on sociocultural theory.
The dissemination of Vygotsky’s ideas and the application
of his work in diverse national contexts have contributed to
“a complex of related but heterogeneous proposals” (Rogoff,
Radziszewska, & Masiello, 1995, p. 125). Vygotsky’s ideas
are condensed and at times not fully developed because he
died at a young age of tuberculosis. Much of his work remains
untranslated into English. In spite of these difficulties, his
theories are increasingly influential in Western countries. The
impact of Vygotsky’s ideas has grown substantially in the
United States, particularly since the publication of a selection
of his writings in Mind in Society (Vygotsky, 1978).
The power of Vygotsky’s ideas lies in his explanation of
the dynamic interdependence of social and individual processes.
He arrived at his views by analyzing the crisis in
psychology he saw in the two predominant schools in the
field, “each of which claimIed] to possess an explanatory
system adequate to become the basis of general psychology”
(Kozulin, 1990, p. 87). In contrast to those approaches, which
focused on internal or subjective experience, and behaviorist
approaches, which focused on the external, Vygotsky conceptualized
development as the transformation of socially shared
activities into internalized processes. In this way he rejected
the Cartesian dichotomy between the internal and the external.
The nature of the interdependence between individual
and social processes in the construction of knowledge can
be clarified by examining three major themes in Vygotsky’s
writings highlighted by Wertsch (1991): (a) Individual
development, including higher mental functioning, has
its origins in social sources; (b) human action, on both the
social and individual planes, is mediated by tools and signs;
and (c) the first two themes are best examined through
genetic, or developmental, analysis. In developing these
themes, we rely on Vygotsky’s writings as well as the
elaborations of his ideas by his coworkers and scholars
influenced by his work.
Social Sources of Development
Human development starts with dependence on caregivers.
The developing individual relies on the vast pool of transmitted
experiences of others. Vygotsky, in his well-known genetic
law of development, emphasized this primacy of social
interaction in human development:
Every function in the cultural development of the child comes
on the stage twice, in two respects; first in the social, later in
the psychological, first in relations between people as an
interpsychological category, afterwards within the child as an
intrapsychological category. ... All higher psychological
functions are internalized relationships of the social kind, and
constitute the social structure of personality, (as cited in
Valsiner, 1987, p. 67)
This principle describes a process situated in, but not limited
to, social interaction. When beginning an activity, learners depend
on others with more experience. Over time they take on
increasing responsibility for their own learning and participation
in joint activity (Lave & Wenger, 1991). Expanding Vygotsky’s
genetic law of development, Rogoff (1990) characterized this
process as guided participation. In her cross-cultural studies, she
documented children’s various forms of participation with parents
and peers. Rogoff found that even when children were not
conversational partners with adults, they were involved in the
adult world as participants in adult agricultural and household
work. She described the supportive engagement of Mayan mothers
with their children as an example of the nonverbal guidance
adults give children:
The routine arrangements and interactions between children
and their caregivers and companions provide children with
thousands of opportunities to observe and participate in the
skilled acti vities of their culture. Through repeated and varied
experience in supported routine and challenging situations,
children become skilled practitioners in the specific cognitive
activities in their communities. (Rogoff, 1991, p. 351)
Thus, learners participate in a wide variety of joint activities
that provide the opportunity for synthesizing several
influences into the learner’s novel modes of understanding
and participation. By internalizing the effects of working
together, the novice acquires useful strategies and crucial
knowledge.
The acquisition of language provides another example of a
social source of development. Zukow-Goldring and Ferko
(1994) and other researchers showed the close relation between
promoting shared attention between beginning speakers and
their caregivers and the emergence of the lexicon. Contemporary
research supports the sociocultural claim that the relationships
between individuals forms a basis for cognitive and linguistic
mastery. This process, whether in the classroom or elsewhere,
includes transmission, construction, transaction, and transformation
in a continuing, complex interplay.
Semiotic Mediation
Semiotic mediation is key to all aspects of knowledge
coconstruction. For Vygotsky, semiotic mechanisms (including
psychological tools) mediate social and individual functioning
and connect the external and the internal, the social
and the individual (Wertsch & Stone, 1985). Vygotsky (1981)
A VYGOTSKIAN FRAMEWORK 193
listed a number of examples of semiotic means: “language;
various systems of counting; mnemonic techniques; algebraic
symbol systems; works of art; writing; schemes, diagrams,
maps and mechanical drawings; all sorts of conventional signs
and so on” (p. 137). Other tools, increasingly recognized in
sociocultural discourse—the paint brush, the computer, calendars,
and symbol systems—are central to the appropriation
of knowledge through representational activity by the developing
individual.
In the introduction to Vygotsky’s Thought and Language,
Bruner (1962) described Vygotsky’s view of the role of
semiotic mediation:
He believed that in mastering nature we master ourselves. For
it is the internalization of overt action that makes thought, and
particularly the internalization of external dialogue that
brings the powerful tool of language to bear on the stream of
thought. Man, if you will, is shaped by the tools and instruments
that he comes to use, and neither the mind nor the hand
alone can amount to much And if neither hand nor intellect
alone prevails, the tools and aids that do are the developing
streams of internalized language and conceptual thought that
sometimes run parallel and sometimes merge, each affecting
the other, (p. vii)
Wertsch (1991) adopted Wittgenstein’s metaphor of a
socially provided tool kit of semiotic means. Those means and
practices, which become internalized and available for independent
activity, are critical in supporting and transforming
mental functioning. Physical tools are directed toward the
external world; psychological tools are directed internally and
are appropriated during activity.
Knowledge is not internalized directly, but through the use
of psychological tools. Vygotsky’s colleague Leontiev (1981)
used the term appropriation to describe the adoption by an
individual of one of these socially available psychological
tools and wrote that children
cannot and need not reinvent the artifacts that have taken
millennia to evolve in order to appropriate such objects into
their own system of activity. The child has only come to an
understanding that is adequate for using the culturally elaborated
object in the novel life circumstances he encounters, (as
cited in Newman, Griffin, & Cole, 1989, p. 63)
Leinhardt (1996), in her discussion of teaching-instructional
explanations of mathematical concepts, provided another example
of semiotic mediation. In describing the role of representations,
she illustrated the concept percent by discussing
various representations, such as number lines, circles, and
squares. Representational activities, whether in the form of inner
As first used by Wood, Bruner, and Ross (1976), scaffolding is a metaphor
for graduated assistance provided to the novice, akin to the caipenter’s
scaffold.
speech, imagery, or kinetic concepts, are linked to culturally
shared systems, such as language, and to developmental activities,
including scaffolding1 (John-Steiner, 1995).
Thus, psychological tools tire not invented by the individual
in isolation. They are products of sociocultural evolution
to which individuals have access by being actively engaged
in the practices of their communities. In a recent article,
Wertsch (1994) elaborated on the centrality of mediation in
understanding Vygotsky’s contributions to psychology and
education:
[Mediation] is the key in his approach to understanding how
human mental functioning is tied to cultural, institutional, and
historical settings since these settings shape and provide the
cultural tools that are mastered by individuals to form this
functioning. In this approach, the mediational means are what
might be termed the “carriers” of sociocultural patterns and
knowledge, (p. 204)
Cognitive pluralism. Although the importance of semiotic
mediation in thinking is recognized by most members
of the sociocultural thought community, interpretations of it
differ. Almost all sociocultural researchers place language in
a central position; however, some consider that other semiotic
means are of little theoretical interest (Kozulin, 1990). We
claim a pluralistic rather than a monistic theory of semiotic
mediation (John-Steiner, 1991, 1995) and coined the term
cognitive pluralism for this stance. Evidence for cognitive
pluralism includes the planning notes of experienced thinkers,
which incorporate words, drawings, musical notes, and scientific
diagrams (John-Steiner, 1985).
The diversity of these means and the psychological tools that
they represent are of special interest to educators who work in
multicultural settings and with children who have special needs.
In an issue of Educational Psychologist devoted to Vygotsky’s
ideas, Gindis (1995) described the emphasis Vygotsky placed
on the variety of psychological tools in approaching the study of
children who had special physical or mental circumstances:
“Vygotsky pointed out that our civilization has already developed
different means (e.g., Braille system, sign language, lip
reading, finger spelling, etc.) to accommodate a handicapped
child’s unique way of acculturation through acquiring various
symbol systems” (p. 79).
These acts of representation are embedded in social practice
and rely on socially developed semiotic means. Ecology,
history, culture, and family organization play roles in patterning
experience and events in the creation of knowledge (John-
Steiner, 1995). For example, the tasks confronting children,
such as learning to talk, to walk, and to attach meaning to their
experiences, are reflected in cognitive strategies derived in
part from the culturally patterned environment into which
they are born. Their thought is shaped by the prevalent methods
of physical and economic survival, by the language and
visual symbols used by their people, and by socially ordered
194 JOHN-STEINER AND MAHN
ways of parenting. Some children born into tribal or agricultural
communities spend many hours strapped to the back of
their mothers and other caregivers. In this position, they
observe and represent the life of their community in a way
that is not possible to children placed in cribs and playpens
(John-Steiner, 1985)
Representational activities and the sociocultural theory
of semiotic mediation are fundamental to Vygotsky’s concept
of internalization and the transformation of interpersonal
processes into intrapersonal ones. Vygotsky used the
concept of semiotic mediation to explain qualitative transformations
in the human mind historically, ontogeneti-
cally, and microgenetically. The role played by semiotic
mediation in the development of higher psychological
processes provided a central focus for Vygotsky’s research.
The concept of semiotic mediation is essential to the sociocultural
view that the process of internalization is transformative
rather than, transmissive.
Genetic Analysis
Vygotsky (1978) used genetic analysis, which examines the
origins and the history of phenomena, focusing on their
interconnectedness, to develop his theoretical framework
and guide his research. In describing this approach he emphasized
the
need to concentrate not on the product of development but on
the very process by which higher forms are established. ...
To study something historically means to study it in the
process of change; that is the dialectical method’s basic
demand. To encompass in research the process of a given
thing’s development in all its phases and changes—from birth
to death—fundamentally means to discover its nature, its
essence, for “it is only in movement that a body shows what
it is.” Thus, the historical (that is in the broadest sense of
history) study of behavior is not an auxiliary aspect of theoretical
study, but rather forms its very base. (pp. 64-65)
According to this perspective, learning and development
take place in socially and culturally shaped contexts. Historical
conditions are constantly changing, resulting in changed
contexts and opportunities for learning. For that reason, there
can be no universal schema that adequately represents the
dynamic relation between external and internal aspects of
development (John-Steiner & Souberman, 1978).
Vygotsky argued that psychological systems that unite
separate functions into new combinations and complexes
arise in the process of development. An example of this
unification is the linking of spoken and written language into
a new and broader semiotic system. When it was discovered
that it was “possible to represent the sounds of language using
marks in clay just as it is possible to represent objects” (Cole,
1990, p. 95), a qualitative transformation in the development
of humanity occurred. The unification of separate functions
represented in literacy also provides insights into the relations
between individual and social processes.
In his studies of disabilities, Vygotsky analyzed the unification
of separate physiological (anatomical, biochemical,
and evolving neural) and psychological processes. His collaborator,
neuropsychologist Luria (1973, 1979), examined
cognitive functions in brain damage at different levels uf
analysis. This led to the concept of functional systems, which
is particularly useful in the examination of phenomena at the
interface of neural and cognitive processes. Functional systems
are dynamic psychological systems in which diverse
internal and external processes are coordinated and integrated.
These systems reveal a variety of characteristics,
including the use of variable means or mechanisms by individuals
to perform particular tasks. In order to succeed when
faced with new learning challenges, these indi vi du als reorganize
their cognitive strategies. Cole and Scribner (19/4)
used die concept of functional systems extensively in their
cross-cultural research, as did Newman. Griffm, and Colo
(1989), who found that
external devices like talk and charts and writing are windows
in the evolution and appearance of cognitive constructs, They
are an essential part of the functional system that gives the
actors as well as the analysts access to the changes occurring.
(p. 73)
Functional system analysis captures the dynamic relation
between changing and stable features of phenomena and the
ways in which these are integrated in different contexts. In
work with Native American children, John-Steiner and Österreich
(1975) found it particularly useful in examining the
children’s use of various learning styles and modalities to
accomplish similar goals and tasks. A functional systems
approach helped analyze Native American children’s learning
approaches, viewing them as part of a dynamic system instead
of splitting them into visual and verbal approaches.
Within genetic analysis, the use of functional systems provides
a framework for representing the complex interrelationships
between external devices, psychological tools, the individual,
and the social world. Vygotsky used the sociocultural
framework based on the three central tenets described previously—social
sources of development, semiotic mediation,
and genetic analysis—to develop his concept of internalization.
VYGOTSKY’S METHODOLOGICAL
APPROACH
An understanding of Vygotsky’s methodological approach
helps to clarify the concept of internalization and to differentiate
it from other theoretical perspectives. Vygotsky approached
methodological issues on two interrelated levels:
the theoretical and the psychological, On the theoretical level
he examined complex systems in the process of change, using
dialectical logic to understand the interrelationships between
A VYGOTSKIAN FRAMEWORK 195
components of the systems. On the psychological level he
chose research methods to capture the dynamics of process
consistent with his theoretical approach. On both levels his
emphasis was on the examination of cognitive change in
diverse contexts: “Any psychological process, whether the
development of thought or voluntary behavior, is a process
undergoing changes right before one’s eyes” (Vygotsky,
1978, p. 61) To capture the processes at play, Vygotsky
used the experimental-developmental method in which
developmental changes are provoked in laboratory settings.
Through intervention, the experimenter is able to
record participants’ initial efforts to solve a problem beyond
their existing means or strategies. One of the intervention
methods was providing auxiliary means through
which the problem could be solved. This type of mediated
assistance was of theoretical and methodological interest to
Vygotsky . In studying memory in complex choice responses,
he focused on the developmental changes taking place in the
course of one or several sessions during which the learner
appropriated new psychological tools.
Contemporary Vygotskian scholars researching cognitive
change in classroom learning rely on both experimental and
qualitative methods to focus on developmental processes.
Sociocultural researchers reject “the cause-effect, stimu-
lus-response, explanatory science in favor of a science that
emphasizes the emergent nature of mind in activity and that
acknowledges a central role for interpretation in its explanatory
framework” (Cole, 1996).
Vygotskian researchers use this theoretical and methodological
approach to study and describe the concept of internalization.
This is germane to the discussion of classroom learning and
teaching in this issue of Educational Psychologist. There is a
vigorous discussion among sociocultural theorists and proponents
of different theoretical perspectives about the way that
concepts are learned and the processes through which they are
acquired, appropriated, or internalized. These processes cannot
be adequately understood, we believe, without comprehending
the dialectical method Vygotsky used to examine them. The next
section presents Vygotsky’s use of the dialectical method, explains
the authors’ conception of internalization, and distinguishes
sociocultural concepts of internalization from other
perspectives.
Dialectical Method
Vygotsky did not simply try to impose laws or principles of
dialectics on existing psychological theories, rather he scientifically
investigated and analyzed concrete questions in specific
areas of psychological inquiry. This approach was described by
one of his collaborators, Leontiev (1977), who wrote that in
science “dialectic logic does not amount to just the formalistic
imposition of its principles on any particular scientific discipline.
It itself develops as scientific inquiry proceeds; it is the result of
empirical science” (p. 54). Vygotsky underscored the centrality
of this method to all of his work:
The search for method becomes one of the most important
problems of the entire enterprise of understanding the
uniquely human forms of psychological activity. In this case,
the method is simultaneously prerequisite and product, the
tool and the result of the study. (Vygotsky, 1978, p. 65)
In contrast to Aristotelian logic, which places phenomena
such as mind and matter into fixed, unchanging categories,
Vygotsky (1978) analyzed higher mental functions as developmental
processes in a constant state of dialectical change.
He examined mind and matter in their interconnectedness and
included a “scientific explanation of both external manifestations
and the process under study” (p. 63).
A central concept of dialectics, the unification of contradictions,
distinguishes it from traditional approaches:
“Whereas, within the standard view, conceptual unity among
objects relies on the commonality of elements, it is the interrelatedness
of diverse elements and the integration of opposites
that creates unity within dialectics” (Falmagne, 1995, p.
207). Dialectics surmounts dichotomies by looking at phenomena
as syntheses of contradictions. In 20th-century physics,
it was the unified vision of light as both wave and particle
that led to a broader theoretical understanding. In nature,
qualitative transformations unify contradictions—water, for
example, as unification of hydrogen and oxygen, will go
through transformations from gas to liquid to solid with
quantitative changes in temperature. In addition, physical
tools can unify contradictory functions—the claw hammer is
used to both pound in and pull out nails; the pencil is used to
create and erase (Weber, 1992).
Vygotsky (1986) used the dialectical notion of synthesis
to analyze a central psychological tool—verbal thought. He
examined the way that thought and speech, which initially
have separate planes or levels of development in children
in a “prelinguistic period in thought and a preintellectual
period of speech” (p. 210), become inextricably intertwined.
Throughout his work Vygotsky used the dialectical
method to analyze, explain, and describe interrelationships
fundamental to human development where others posited
dichotomies—for example, mind and matter, language and
thought, external and inner speech, nature and culture, and
social and individual processes in the construction of
knowledge.
Our concept of development implies a rejection of the
frequently held view that cognitive development results
from the gradual accumulation of separate changes. We
believe that child development is a complex dialectical
process characterized by periodicity, unevenness in the
development of different functions, metamorphosis or
qualitative transformation of one form into the other, intertwining
of external and internal factors, and adaptive
196 JOHN-STEINER AND MAHN
processes that overcome impediments that the child encounters.
(Vygotsky, 1978, p. 73)
Using this approach, sociocultural theorists analyze internalization
and individual and social processes as interrelated
parts of neurophysiological, psychological, educational, political,
and cultural systems (Tobach, 1995).
Internalization
Our concept of internalization recognizes unique human
minds that owe their existence to and are inextricably intertwined
with social, historical, cultural, and material processes
(including brain activities). Internalization is conceived of as
a representational activity, a process that occurs simultaneously
in social practice and in the human brain/mind. Sociocultural
researchers include the learners’ appropriation of
socially elaborated symbol systems as a critical aspect of
learning-driven development. This appropriation of symbol
systems was a central focus of Vygotsky’s work, particularly
as applied to educational pedagogy, and led to his most fully
elaborated application of the concept of internalization—the
transformation of communicative language into inner speech
and further into verbal thinking (Vygotsky, 1986, chap. 7).
Although “cognitive constructivist research and practice
... is mostly oriented toward understanding the individual
learner” (Derry, this issue, p. 164) and separates individual
processes of knowledge construction from social processes of
joint understanding, we think of them as connected and interdependent.
The development of the mind of the child is both
individual and social at the same time and is the result of a
long process of developmental events (Vygotsky, 1978). A
focus of sociocultural research is the study of the way that the
coconstruction of knowledge is internalized, appropriated,
transmitted, or transformed in formal and informal learning
settings.
Vygotsky (1978) examined and explained the processes
through which humans construct minds in interaction with the
external world of nature and with other humans, changing in
the process both themselves and nature:
The dialectical approach, while admitting the influence of
nature on man, asserts that man, in turn, affects nature and
creates through his changes in nature new natural conditions
for his existence. This position is the keystone of our approach
to the study and interpretation of man’s higher psychological
functions and serves as the basis for the new methods of
experimentation and analysis we advocate, (pp. 60-61)
The Russian philosopher Ilyenkov added that “the socio-
historical environment, the world of things, created by human
labour, and the system of human relations, formed in the
process of labour” must also be considered, and that “outside
the individual lies not only nature as such (‘in itself), but also
humanized nature, nature remade by human labour” (as cited
in Bakhurst, 1995, p. 165).
In a psychological framework, the unification of nature
and culture is powerfully embodied in early development. For
example, a human embryo is both a material and a conceptual
reality for the mother, but its own consciousness is dependent
on the full (prenatal and postnata 1) develop ment of the infant’s
own nervous system and his or her subsequent internalization
of culturally developed sign systems. Bakhurst (1995) wrote
that “the nature and content of an individual’s mental life
cannot be understood independently of the culture of which
that individual is part” (p. 159). He further suggested that
there are two intuitions that He behind the claims of “strong
cultural theories of the mind”:
The first is that meaning is the medium of the mental, and
meaning is (in some sense) socially constructed; the second
is that the human mind, and the forms of talk in which human
beings explain and predict the operations of minds, should be
understood on the model of tools, and like all artifacts, we
cannot make sense of them independently of the social processes
which make them what they are. (p. 159)
Lemke (1995) posed the contradictory character of the
relation between individual and social processes in the making
of meaning: “how to have an active, creative human
subject which constructs social meanings, at the same tinie
that this subject itself must: be a social construction” (p. 80).
Vygotsky’s use of dialectics to unravel this contradictory
relation between individual and social processes in which the
individual constructs the social and at the same time is constructed
by the social distinguishes the sociocultural perspective
from others presented in this issue. We favor the view of
Penuel and Wertsch (1995):
Sociocultural processes on the one hand and individual functioning
on the other [exist] in a dynamic, irreducible tension
rather than a static notion of social determination. A sociocultural
approach ... considers these poles of sociocultural processes
and individual functioning as interacting moments in
human action, rather than as static processes that exist in
isolation from one another, (p. 84)
Distinctions From Other Perspectives
The way in which internalization has been interpreted by a
variety of critics highlights the distinctions between sociocultural
and other approaches. For example, social constructivist
critics of the Vygotskian framework, such as Cobb
and Yackel (this issue), characterize it as a transmission
model through which students inherit the cultural meanings
that constitute their intellectual bequest from prior generations.
Their position was both linked to and differentiated
from a Vygotskian stand when they questioned the metaphor
“of students and teachers being embedded or included in
A VYGOTSKIAN FRAMEWORK 197
social practice” (Cobb, Wood, & Yackel, 1993, p. 96). Although
their emergent approach has many commonalities
with sociocultural theory, Cobb and Yackel repeatedly criticize
the latter as a transfer-of-knowledge model in which
students imitate “established mathematical practices” (this
issue, p. 179). This interpretation of sociocultural theory
reduces and simplifies the mutuality of learning and its interpersonal
and intergenerational dynamic. In attempting to
differentiate their approaches from sociocultural theory, social
constructivists misinterpret the transformative character
of internalization as described by sociocultural researchers
(John-Steiner, 1996).
The conceptualization of internalization as unidirectional
transmission freezes the debate, in part, by distorting sociocultural
theorists’ views of the roles of both teacher and
student. It does not recognize that the sociocultural theory of
internalization analyzes the complex process of transmission,
transformation, and synthesis in the coconstruction of knowledge.
As Leontiev wrote, “the process of internalization is not
the transferal of an external activity to a preexisting internal
‘plane of consciousness’: it is the process in which this plane
is formed” (as cited in Wertsch & Stone, 1985, p. 163). In
classroom learning, the student plays an active role and constantly
informs the teacher as their mutual negotiation and
collaboration build knowledge.
As well as the presentation of new information, there needs
to be extended opportunity for discussion and problem-solving
in the context of shared activities, in which meaning and
action are collaborati vely constructed and negotiated. In other
words, education must be thought of in terms not of the
transmission of knowledge but of transaction and transformation.
(Chang-Wells & Wells, 1993, p. 59)
We explore other studies of classroom collaboration exhibiting
transformative knowledge coconstruction later in this
article.
There are different modes of internalization, reflecting
different teaching-interaction strategies. A continuum with
direct instruction on one end and creative, collaborative learning
on the other could describe the wide range of teaching-learning
situations in which internalization occurs.
Whether in the learning of a young child or in the activities
of experienced thinkers, internalization is a fundamental part
of the lifelong process of the coconstruction of knowledge
and the creation of the new.
Other critics warn that using the concept of internalization
to explain the learning processes creates the danger of focusing
on just the individual mental construction of knowledge.
For example, Packer (1993), in his analysis, which was linked
to a hermeneutic, interpretive approach, suggested that “Descartes’
ghost may still be with us” (p. 263) because he saw
elements of dualism in sociocultural concepts of internalization.
Although he appreciated the work of Vygotskian scholars,
Packer was concerned that “the processes and mechanisms
being examined keep creeping back inside the head”
(p. 263). In contrasting the view of learning as mental change
with an alternative that focuses on participatory activities, his
analysis is similar to that of Rogoff (1994): “Learning is a
process of transforming participation in shared sociocultural
endeavors” (p. 210).
In our view, internalization is simultaneously an individual
and a social process. In working with, through, and beyond
what they have appropriated in social participation and then
internalized, individuals coconstruct new knowledge. In contrast
to facile internalization, which leads to a limited combination
of ideas, internalization that involves sustained social
and individual endeavors becomes a constituent part of the
interaction with what is known and leads to the creation of
new knowledge. Chang-Wells and Wells (1993), in their
study of the role of instructional conversations in classroom
learning, described this interdependent and transformative
view of internalization: “It is at points of negotiation of
meaning in conversation that learning and development occur,
as each learner’s individual psychological processes mediate
(and at the same time are mediated by) the constitutive
intermental processes of the group” (p. 86).
Sociocultural approaches are also distinguished from other
perspectives by the importance they place on cultural variation
and its interrelationship with development (John-Steiner
& Panofsky, 1992). This distinction is particularly relevant in
contrasting sociocultural approaches with those derived from
a Piagetian framework. The emphasis on culture resulted in
the broad use by sociocultural researchers of approaches that
examine the ways in which learning and teaching take place
under different cultural circumstances and in different historical
contexts, contributing to a contextualized rather than a
universalistic theory of development. And although social
constructivists do engage in an analysis of cultural norms,
they maintain a conceptual dichotomy between the individual’s
constructive activity, on the one hand, and social processes,
on the other. For example, Cobb and Yackel (this issue)
view the individual through one lens and the social through
another, without making explicit the dialectical interdependence
of social and individual processes. To study these processes
interdependently requires a reliance on cross-cultural
comparisons and active collaboration between researchers
drawn from varied backgrounds examining teachers and children
in diverse settings.
The significant role of cross-cultural comparisons in theory
construction and the development of educational practice
is illustrated by the work of Tharp and Gallimore (1988) and
their collaborators who developed a highly effective, culturally
sensitive approach to teaching Hawaiian children. In their
well-known Kamehameha Early Education Program, instructional
conversations were designed to resemble the talk story
format—overlapping speech, joint performance, and informal
turn taking—favored in the native Hawaiian community.
However, when this highly successful program was implemented
among Navajo children, the results were mixed (Jor
198 JOHN-STEINER AND MAHN
dan, Tharp, & Vogt, 1985). The researchers became aware of
the difficulties in applying a promising, culturally sensitive
approach from one indigenous context to another. They found
that for Hawaiian children, four or five students in groups of
mixed sex and ability produced the maximum peer interaction
and learning cooperation. However, Navajo children were
uncomfortable in the larger mixed groups and worked best in
dyads of the same sex. These studies illustrated the importance
to sociocultural approaches of inclusion of anthropologists,
native teachers, and the learners themselves as educational
activity planners whose joint efforts help educators
understand the culturally patterned learning styles children
bring to school. This emphasis upon interdisciplinary action
research by Vygotskian educators contrasts with other approaches
in educational psychology.
Sociocultural researchers emphasize methods that document
cognitive and social change. Rather than seeing a
dichotomy between quantitative and qualitative research,
approaches are chosen that emphasize process, development,
and the multiple ways in which both can be revealed.
They include experimental research such as Frauenglass
and Diaz’s (1985) work on private speech, which studied
Vygotsky’s hypotheses on the universality and self-regulatory
significance of private speech. In a laboratory setting,
they
compared the frequencies of preschoolers’ private speech in
perceptual versus semantic tasks, with or without instructions
that permitted and encouraged theuse of overt verbalizations.
... [And found] that researchers who choose to study private
speech in laboratory settings must pay close attention to task
and setting variables that may increase or inhibit the amount
of private speech produced by children in their samples.
(Diaz, 1992, p. 57)
Other sociocultural approaches combine experimental
and ethnographic research as illustrated by Scribner and
Cole’s (1981) work in Liberia. In their studies of literacy,
they included observational and ethnographic methods and
combined them with tasks first developed in laboratory
settings. Examples of sociocultural methods of research on
cognitive change in the classroom are described in the next
section.
SOCIOCULTURAL EDUCATIONAL
RESEARCH AND PRACTICE
This section briefly examines Vygotsky’s analysis of the
relation between learning and development, his concept of
the zone of proximal development, and implications drawn
from them for research on collaborative learning. Vygotsky’s
analysis of spontaneous and scientific concepts is
then examined, focusing on the central roles in concept
formation played by language and culture. The integrated
influences of culture and language are then examined in
practical applications of sociocultural approaches to classroom
learning and teaching in literacy instruction. An additional
and related theme highlighted in this section is the way
sociocultural theory helps educators provide instruction that
recognizesandempowerslinguisticallyandculturallydiverse
students.
Learning and Development and the Zone
of Proximal Development
In contrast to prevailing theories of his time that dichotomized
learning and development, viewing one as an external and the
other as an internal process, Vygotsky (1978) looked at their
unity and interdependence starting from a child’s birth:
Our hypothesis establishes the unity but not the identity of
learning processes and internal developmental processes. It
presupposes that the one is converted into the other. Therefore,
it becomes an important concern of psychological research
to show how external knowledge and abilities in
children become internalized, (pp. 90-91)
Vygotsky thus criticized theories such as Piaget’s, in
which “maturation is viewed as a precondition of learning but
never the result of it” (1978, p. 80), and developed the
following position:
Learning awakens a variety of internal developmental processes
that are able to Operate only when the child is interacting with
people in his environment and in cooperation with his peers_
Learning is not development; however, properly organized
learning results in mental development and sets in motion a
variety of developmental processes that would be impossible
apart from learning. Thus learning is a necessary and universal
aspect of the process of developing culturally organized, specifically
human, psychological functions, (p. 90)
To help explain the way that this social and participatory
learning took place, Vygotsky (1978) developed the concept of
the zone of proximal development, which he defined as “the
distance between the actual developmental level as determined
through independent problem solving and the level of potential
development as determined through problem solving under adult
guidance or in collaboration with more capable peers” (p. 86).
Sociocultural theorists, expanding the concept of the zone of
proximal development, increasingly conceptualize learning as
distributed (Cole & Engeström, 1993), interactive (Chang-Wells
& Wells, 1993), contextual (John-Steiner, Panofsky, & Smith,
1994), and the result of the learners ’ participation in a community
of practice (Rogoff, 1994).
Brown and her collaborators (1992, 1993) developed and
implemented educational programs based on this concept of
learning. They suggested that the acti ve agents within the zone
of proximal development “can include people, adults and
children, with various degrees of expertise, but it can also
include artifacts, such as books, videos, wall displays, seien-
A VYGOTSKIAN FRAMEWORK 199
tifie equipment and a computer environment intended to
support intentional learning” (1993, p. 191). In expanding the
zone of proximal development to include artifacts in addition
to people, Brown integrated Vygotsky’s analyses of tools and
symbols with the roles played by the participants in the
learning process. One of the important features of Brown and
her collaborators’ work is the examination of the way “divergent
classrooms can become learning communities—communities
in which each participant makes significant contributions
to the emergent understandings of all members,
despite having unequal knowledge concerning the topic under
study” (Palincsar, Brown, & Campione, 1993, p. 43). They
examined the role of “reciprocal teaching,” an approach in
which “students and teachers take turns leading discussions
about shared text” (p. 43), to see whether structured dialogues
foster a learning community. The teachers in these studies had
a changing role. They shared with the students the well-defined
tasks of questioning, clarifying, summarizing, and predicting
in order to construct text-based knowledge. These
studies exemplify two themes in sociocultural approaches to
classroom learning and teaching: (a) the implementation of
an educational program that allowed for or encouraged the
coconstruction of knowledge and (b) the analysis of this
learning that contributed to our understanding of classroom
learning from a sociocultural perspective. Collaborative
learning plays an increasing role in these as well as many other
innovative classrooms.
Collaboration Research
In current applications of sociocultural theory with emphases
on coparticipation, cooperative learning, and joint discovery,
teachers bring existing knowledge to students by cocon-
structing it with them. These applications make clear the need
to examine patterns of interaction and collaboration in this
type of classroom. A major goal of our research is to produce
a theoretical model of the collaboration process and to identify
collaborator’s values, roles, working methods, and conflict-
resolution strategies.3 Through the analysis of selected project
documents and transcribed discourse from group meetings, as
well as through focused interviews, our initial work revealed
four patterns—distributed, complementary, family, and integrative—among
individuals, small groups, and larger complex
collaborations (see Figure 1). We use a circle and dotted
lines to show that collaborative efforts are dynamic, changing
3
Supported by National Science Foundation Grant #SBR-9423277, we,
together with Michele Minnis, Robert J. Weber, and Teresa Meehan, are
examining values, roles, responsibilities, working methods, and conflict-
resolution strategies to develop patterns of collaboration in long-term interdisciplinary
and interinstitutional projects organized to solve complex social
and technical problems. The two main collaborative groups we are analyzing
consist of adults involved in a water consortium and adults and adolescents
participating in a program the focus of which is on middle school students
whose home, school, and community environments make them susceptible
to drug and alcohol abuse.
processes. Although the corresponding characteristics of values,
working methods, and roles for each pattem are depicted
in the bands around the wheel, there is no rigidity in the
divisions. The order of the patterns is not hierarchical, and a
collaboration can be initiated at any level and be transformed
over time. A goal is to examine how the resolutions of tensions
inherent in collaborations transform the character of the collaboration
and determine whether it continues.
In the move from the outer edge of the wheel in Figure 1
to the center, collaborations tend to be longer term and are
characterized by the increasing importance of negotiated and
common values. In distributed collaborations, such as collective
e- mail discussions in which the exchange of information
is featured, values need not extend beyond similar interests;
whereas in integrated collaborations—long-term, often dyadic,
and intimate—values are reflected in the development
of shared ideologies. Complementary collaborations, such as
those found in the organization of teams in classrooms and in
the business world, are distinguished by clear divisions of
labor and discipline-based approaches. In contrast, family
collaborations, often centered on providing social services,
including education, are characterized by the fluidity of roles
and the integration of expertise.
The conceptualization of the patterns of collaboration in
Figure 1 is of use in the study of classrooms engaged in
collaborative learning. Complex social relationships and different
cultural values shape the intellectual interdependence
in the coconstruction of knowledge in classes that are not
based on the traditional teacher-centered transmission model
of education.
The way that cultural and linguistic factors shape learning and
development and the impact that tírese factors have on pedagogical
approaches provide a theoretical foundation for sociocultural
research of collaboration in the classroom. There is a growing
literature on cooperative learning and peer collaboration, of
interest to both Piagetian and Vygotskian researchers (Damon
& Phelps, 1989; Slavin, 1983, 1987; Tudge & Rogoff, 1989),
which can inform classroom practice.
In differentiating their approach from others, Forman and
McPhail (1993) highlighted three features of a sociocultural
perspective on the study of collaboration in education. First,
rather than locating the source of individual motivation and
understanding within or between individuals, they located it
in sociocultural practices in which children have the opportunity
“to observe and participate in essential economic, religious,
legal, political, instructional, or recreational activities.”
Through guided participation “children internalize or appropriate
their affective, social, and intellectual significance” (p.
218). Second, Forman and McPhail wrote,
For Vygotsky, cognitive, social, and motivational factors
were interrelated in development. Thus it makes no sense to
evaluate the benefits of peer collaboration in purely intellectual
terms, e.g., via individual achievement testing. A Vygotskian
perspective also implies that the outcomes of peer
200 JOHN-STEINBRAND MAHN
Collaboration: Roles, Values and Working Methods
Roles sÿi4
/ .A° ,
/ ^
'' ^ # ''' 4rf>
/ *$■ / / сЯ-°Ч
/ Λ '' ^
/ * / S У
■ ' ' * /V
S %> 'n. Values
• i /
• I
> I ( 1 I I
*w\ %л
4 '' V*>
V;\ \\ % \
\ ''' % '''
\\ \ \
Ä '· % \ % \
'"v\V \ %. \ » \
' Ф· cTL \ Λ i \
4 «Ł » «Ь ■* 1 \ *T 0> ’ Id I I ' Ä i I
l 1
I I
V \
' ^ 4'
' V* 4 * \ \ fL
' ' \ 4 yv 4 t*
\ ^ Г1 '4 \
\ \ X \>
\ <5 \ \ \ \ \ \> ' <į( 'N
\ %
Patterns \
/ » 0» / i / ‘ - ¡ ú I
ŕ / P
ao / Ä » ƒ „Л / d# / и / ^ Л ' ' # /
^ /
■"
0у(\»даЧС ^ /
~--^УУ У / siv~ «P у Working
yjc^ Methods
FIGURE 1 Phases of the developmental research cycle.
collaboration must be evaluated in context and over time. (p.
218)
The third feature of Forman and McPhail’s (1993) approach
was that discourse analysis can be used to examine
participants’
epistemological and affective dispositions toward collaborative
problem solving. Their discourse should reflect their
individual and shared understandings and feelings about the
task setting, as well as the definitions of the activity that are
provided by their particular cultural and historical situation,
(pp. 218-219).
Using this framework, Forman and McPhail (1993) examined
the ways in which learners assist each other. Their work,
which focused on dyads engaged in problem-solving activities,
illustrated the complementary pattern of collaboration.
The two students in the study, after initial differences on task
definition, developed a division of labor based on areas of
expertise reflected in specialized forms of discourse—scientific
and mathematical. This study highlighted the need to
develop joint perspectives over time to achieve shared goals.
Forman and McPhail emphasized the role of mutuality and
the use of specialized forms of discourse “to engage in logical
arguments, to share ideas, and to work together in the pursuit
of common goals” (p. 226). (This finding corresponds to our
own; we found the importance of trust in the development of
working methods in sustained collaboration.)
A different pattern of collaboration was revealed in Moll
and Whitmore’s (1993) study of a bilingual classroom in
the southwestern United States in which reading and writing
in two languages were integrated in project-oriented
literacy activities. This study, using a sociocultural approach,
examined the interactive and contextual character
of cognitive change as students created and participated in
communities of learners. The collaboration described by
Moll and Whitmore (1993) exemplified the family pattern,
with a fluidity of roles and a reliance on various areas of
expertise from the students and the teacher in the joint
construction of knowledge. Because the teachers and children
were actively and mutually creating learning situations,
the roles of both were flexible. The children often
took the lead in shaping text-related discussions. The
teacher’s roles included those of guide and supporter
whose “guidance [was] purposely mediated, almost hidden,
embedded in the activities”; participant in thematic
research activities; evaluator of the students’ development;
and facilitator and planner who organized “the environment,
curriculum, and materials to provide functional and
purposeful uses for language, literacy, and learning processes”
(p. 38). At the same time the “children [had] consid
A VYGOTSKIAN FRAMEWORK 201
erable control of virtually all aspects of their own learning
experiences.They select[ed] groups, reading materials, writing
topics, theme topics, and language to use for each” (p. 38). Moll
and Whitmore (1993) described a pattern of collaboration in
which the development of trust among the participants was of
central concern. These patterns of shared responsibilities in
teaching and learning contribute to a broadened understanding
of the zone of proximal development and help illustrate the
emerging patterns of collaboration shown in Figure 1.
Another example of the family pattern of collaboration is
the afterschool program known as the Fifth Dimension, developed
by Michael Cole, Peg Griffin, and their collaborators
at the University of California, San Diego, which brings
together children and adolescents, community institutions,
undergraduate students, and researchers. It relies upon computer
technology, collaborative learning, play, and imagination
“within the framework of a shared and voluntarily accepted
system of impersonal rules” (Nicolopoulou & Cole,
1993, p. 293). Cole (1995) and his colleagues extended Vygotskian
analyses of learning beyond the dyadic and small-
group level to include an examination of different sites as
institutional and cultural contexts for these activities. The
success of the Fifth Dimension is based, in part, on the
character of the collaboration, which includes a fluidity of
roles across ages and areas of expertise. The integration of
play and learning helps meet the shared goals and objectives
of the program. This innovative, collaborative program contrasts
with traditional models of education, which isolate
teachers in their classrooms.
Sociocultural research on collaboration also includes examination
of the mutual dependence of teachers engaged in
collective activity and dialogue in the process of curriculum
innovation. Engeström (1994), in his study of teachers, found
an additional benefit of collaboration research:
One of the most persistent methodological difficulties of
studying thinking has to do with access to online data from
thought processes. When thinking is defined as a private,
individual phenomenon only indirect data is accessible.
Thinking embedded in collaborative practical activity must
to a significant degree take the form of talk, gesture, use of
artifacts, or some other publicly accessible mediational instrumentality;
otherwise mutual formation of ideas would be
rendered impossible. Collaborative thinking opens up access
to direct data on thought processes, (p. 45)
Teachers in traditional schools often do not have the opportunity
to interact with colleagues, as did the teachers in the
Engeström study, and thus have “limited opportunities for
receiving assistance through modeling and feedback, two
means of assistance crucial to acquisition of complex social
repertoires . necessary to meet (he criterion of teaching-as-
assisted-performance in the zone of proximal development”
(Gallimore & Tharp, 1990, p. 201).
A particularly powerful example of collaboration, and one
that can inform our efforts at educational reform, was provided
by Brazilian teachers who worked together with community
activists to educate previously excluded populations
(Souza Lima, 1995). Their local initiatives, broadened and
strengthened through the use of the sociocultural theories of
Vygotsky, Wallon, and Freire, were applied to citywide and
broader reform efforts. Studies of teachers in dynamic interactions
with other teachers, students, researchers, and reformers
are important in the ongoing sociocultural research into
collaboration and educational change.
Spontaneous and Scientific Concepts
In classrooms in which there is coparticipation, cooperative
learning, and joint discovery, environments are created in
which students are able to build upon the culturally shaped
knowledge and value systems they bring to school. Vygotsky’s
analysis of spontaneous and scientific concepts provides
a foundation for examining how children learn before
they enter school and how this knowledge relates to concepts
learned at school.
By spontaneous concepts Vygotsky meant concepts that are
acquired by the child outside of the context of explicit instruction.
In themselves these concepts are mostly taken from
adults, but they never have been introduced to the child in a
systematic fashion and no attempts have been made to connect
them with other related concepts. Because Vygotsky
explicitly acknowledged the role of adults in the formation of
these so-called spontaneous concepts he preferred to call
them “everyday” concepts, thus avoiding the idea that they
had been spontaneously invented by the child. ... By “scientific”
concepts Vygotsky meant concepts that had been explicitly
introduced by a teacher at school. Ideally such concepts
would cover the essential aspects of an area of
knowledge and would be presented as a system of interrelated
ideas, (van der Veer & Vlasiner, 1991, p. 270)
Although Vygotsky (1986) discussed spontaneous and
scientific concepts by highlighting their distinguishing characteristics,
he recognized their interdependence. He wrote,
We believe that the two processes—the develop ment of spontaneous
and of nonspontaneous concepts—are related and
constantly influence each other. They are parts of a single
process: the development of concept formation which is
affected by varying external and internal conditions but is
essentially a unitary process, not a conflict of antagonistic,
mutually exclusive forms of thinking, (p. 157)
The social situatedness of concept formation was studied
by Moll (1992), who used Vygotsky’s analysis to gain insight
into providing effective education for linguistically and culturally
diverse students:
202 JOHN-STEINER AND MAHN
One advantage [of a sociocultural approach] is that in studying
human beings dynamically, within their social circumstances,
in their full complexity, we gain a much more complete
and ... a much more valid understanding of them. We
also gain, particularly in the case of minority children, a more
positive view of their capabilities and how our pedagogy
often constrains, and just as often distorts, what they do and
what they are capable of doing, (p. 239)
Analyzing how students learn, as well as acknowledging
and attempting to understand the culturally conditioned
knowledge they bring to the classroom, can help lead to
effective teaching. In an ethnographic study looking at how
the knowledge that existed in Mexican American students’
households could be used to bring about innovative instructional
practice, Moll and Greenberg (1990) found a variety of
“funds of knowledge” including knowledge “about different
soils, tire cultivation of plants, and water management ...
animal husbandry, veterinary medicine, ranch economy, and
mechanics as well as carpentry, masonry, electrical wiring”
(p. 323). They also found that this knowledge was socially
distributed and that a reciprocal relation existed between
everyday knowledge used to understand school material and
classroom activities used to help students understand social
reality. To facilitate this interaction, an afterschool lab was
created “within which researchers, teachers, and students
[met] to experiment with the teaching of literacy. We
[thought] of this lab setting, following Vygotsky, as a ‘mediating’
structure that facilitate[d] strategic connections, multiple
paths, between classrooms and household” (p. 320). Without
such mediating structures, investigations into discourse
practices in school and home found that the variations between
the two can lead to problems as students adjust to the
requirements of formal education.
In order to understand children in school settings, sociocultural
approaches examine the development of language and
the ways in which culturally different modes of discourse,
both within and between cultures, shape children’s development
and impact their educational experiences.
From birth, the social forms of child-caretaker interactions,
the tools used by humans in society to manipulate the environment,
the culturally institutionalized patterns of social
relations, and languageį operating together as a socio-semi-
otic system, are used by the child in cooperation with adults
to organize behavior, perception, memory, and complex mental
processes. For children, the development of language is a
development of social existence into individuated persons
and into culture. (John-Steiner & Tatter, 1983, p. 83)
The linguist Gee (1989) argued that “discourses are intimately
related to the distribution of social power and hierarchical
structure in society” (p. 20). The impact of different,
culturally patterned modes of discourse is felt from the primary
grades through higher education. Minnis (1994) examined
the ways in which linguistically and culturally diverse
students were at a disadvantage in law school when faced with
the norms of a legal community indifferent to their culture,
discourse, and values. She quoted a Chicana law student:
The game is alien to your upbringing. It is a manipulation of
words in a foreign tongue—words which mystify, manipulation
which obscures your search for justice. You will fee! as
if you don’t belong. ... Group learning was almost impossible.
Most of my classmates were heartlessly competitive. ...
If I were to call someone ambitious in English, it would be a
compliment. If I were to say the same in Spanish, it would be
an insult, (pp: 382-383)
Studies of schooled discourses are of particular interest to
contemporary students of education and development. Some
of these discourses are empowering, as in the bilingual classroom
studied by Moll and Whitmore (1993); others contribute
to the oppression of the silenced (Belenky, Clinchy, Goldberger,
& Tarule, 1986; Cazden, 1988, 1993; Freire, 1970). Gee
(1991), drawing on research by Scribner and Cole (1981),
Heath (1983), and others, identified sociocultural explanations
of school failure: (a) discontinuities between the culture
(values, attitudes, and beliefs) of the home and school; (b)
mismatches in communicative practices between nonmainstream
children and mainstream teachers, which lead to mis-
communication and misjudgments; and (c) the internalization
of negative slereotypes by minority groups who have been
marginalized and often see school as a site for opposition and
resistance. Children whose mode of discourse is different
from that used in school instruction find themselves at a
disadvantage and often drop out, or are forced out, of school.
The ways in which children acquire language and construct
knowledge in nonschool environments and the dynamic relation
with what they are taught in school is maximally relevant
to school learning. The conceptual and theoretical tool of
spontaneous and scientific concepts provides particularly interesting
applications and expansions in literacy acquisition.
Literacy Acquisition
Since the time when Vygotsky and the young Russian psychologists
of the 1920s faced the social task of educating an
overwhelmingly illiterate population following the tremendous
upheavals that transformed the Soviet Union during the
Russian Revolution of 1917, literacy acquisition has been a
central concern of sociocultural theory. Forexample, Scribner
and Cole (1981) built on Vygotsky’s examination of the role
of literacy in the transformation of children’s learning when
they enter school and analyzed the relation between literacy
and cognitive development. They found that literacy can be
acquired independently of schooling (particularly, schooling
in the vast Western systems of education) and that literacy
practices used in different contexts have specific effects on
cognitive competencies. Their findings contrasted with more
un i versal accounts of the relation between I iteracy and formal
modes of thought (Olson, 1977).
A VYGOTSKIAN FRAMEWORK 203
Chang-Wells and Wells (1993) used Vygotsky’s work on
both learning and development, and spontaneous and scientific
concepts to examine three dimensions of change in mental
functioning that can be ascribed to formal learning: intellectuali-
zation of mental functions, bringing them under conscious and
voluntary control; decontextualization, being able to detach a
concept from the context in which it was first encountered; and
a movement toward integration and systematization. They asserted
that all these dimensions of cognitive change
are dependent on literacy, when it is understood not simply
as the encoding and decoding of written language or the use
of written texts for functional purposes but as engaging with
texts of all kinds in ways that exploit the symbolic representation
of meaning as a means of empowering intrapersonal
mental activity, (p. 61)
Using this theoretical foundation, they analyzed the use of
effective instructional discourse in two classrooms designed
to present literacy instruction in the students’ zones of proximal
development.
To create an effective learning environment for literacy
acquisition, Vygotsky (1978) wrote,
Teaching should be organized in such a way that reading and
writing are necessary for something. ... That writing should
be meaningful... That writing be taught naturally ... and that
the natural methods of teaching reading and writing involve
appropriate operations on the child’s environment, (pp.
117-118)
These considerations influenced recent sociocultural approaches
to literacy instruction for children and adults in
school, at workplaces, and in after-school, home, and day care
settings (Clay & Cazden, 1990; John-Steiner, Panofsky, &
Smith, 1994; McNamee, 1990; Scribner & Cole, 1981; Ze-
broski, 1994).
Using a genetic approach to literacy acquisition, sociocultural
theory examines the origins of both reading and writing.
Panofsky ( 1994) studied the role of parent-child book reading
in early literacy socialization, focusing on the functions and
uses of language. She differentiated between representational
and interactional functions of language, building upon Vygotsky’s
distinctions. Illustrating the roles of scaffolding and the
zone of proximal development, she noted “a shift in the use
of functions from a predominance of parent initiations to a
predominance of child initiations” (p. 239).
Vygotsky (1978) considered early literacy experiences
important in the acquisition process. He saw the origin of
writing in a child’s gesture, which “is the initial visual sign
that contains the child’s future writing as an acorn contains a
future oak. Gestures, it has been correctly said, are writing in
air, and written signs frequently are simply gestures that have
been fixed” (p. 107). In the child’s development, there are two
other domains in which gestures are linked to the origins of
written language. The first is in scribbling and the dramatizations
that often accompany it; the second is in the area of
symbolic play, in which a child assigns meaning to an object
through gesture. The varied sources of writing in children’s
early years intrigued Vygotsky, who wrote of drawing and
play as preparation to literacy. In a related vein, McLane
(1990) found in a study of writing by children in an afterschool
day care program thait “children will, with adult involvement
and support, use writing as a resource for extending
their interests in drawing, in pretend and exploratory play,
and as a means of exploring and conducting social relationships”
(p. 317).
As a result of being read to and using a writing tool to
inscribe a piece of paper, or often a wall, the child develops
spontaneous concepts in the process of telling stories, acting
out roles in imaginative play, or creating representations.
When children begin formal schooling, they start with a
foundation that is shaped by the nature of the interaction
between caretaker and child, by literacy uses valued by a
particular culture, by print in the environment, and by the
child’s own activity in literacy events. The challenge is to
value and build on what the child brings to the classroom. “By
broadening both teachers’ and students’ views of students’
backgrounds and existing knowledge, the unique experiences
that students bring to school make an important contribution
to the process of literacy acquisition” (Hiebert, 1991, p. 3). In
a study of Latino households in California, Gallimore and
Goldenberg (1993) identified meaningful settings, which provide
literacy activities, such as letter writing, for novice
learners of reading and writing. They focused on cultural
experiences in everyday life and on the active participation of
young learners in literacy events. If such a focus is not
adopted, teachers will not be able to understand their students’
attempts at literate ways of thinking (Langer, 1991), nor will
they be able to provide the learning opportunities to facilitate
literacy acquisition for all students.
Such differences in language use in ethnically mixed classes
often result in differential access to literacy experiences. ...
Teachers often unknowingly exclude or reduce the time minority
students participate in literacy activities because features
of their discourse do not conform to teachers’ expectations
or match their speaking style. (McCullom, 1991, pp.
111-112)
Understanding differences such as these are also important
in teaching English to speakers of other languages. Sociocultural
theory recognizes the need for cultural, cognitive, and
attitudinal bridges between English as a Second Language
(ESL) students and their new environment. The use of dialogue
journals with elementary and secondary students, as
well as with adults, has been found to be an effective technique
to coconstruct knowledge by allowing ESL students to
draw on their own experiences and develop their own voices
in meaningful, interactive, written communication (Mahn,
1992; Staton, Shuy, Peyton, & Reed, 1988).
204 JOHN-STEINER AND MAHN
In recent years there has been a critical réévaluation of the
traditional methods of literacy instruction based on a single,
universal timetable and on cross-cultural universality. Vygotsky’s
advice about teaching literacy as a natural process is
realized in whole language (Goodman, 1975; Goodman &
Goodman, 1979) and process approaches to reading and writing
(Calkins, 1986; Emig, 1971; Graves, 1983; Murray, 1985).
Illese approaches view the interdependence of social and individual
processes as a natural part of each student’s development
(Scinto, 1986). Reading and writing are not structured as solitary
acts, rather they develop in collaborative efforts in a community
of learners (Zebroski, 1994). The core elements of these innovative
approaches to literacy instruction draw from and are supported
by sociocultural theory and research.
The proponents and practitioners of such techniques and
approaches, however, may not have ever heard of Vygotsky
or of sociocultural approaches. Increasingly, however, teachers
exposed to these ideas offer the sentiment that sociocultural
theoretical perspectives provide the language for what they
are doing in their classrooms. This shows both the limitations
of and the promise for sociocultural approaches. Because this
theory is complex and breaks radically from the traditional
American educational model in which teachers were
schooled, it is hard to appropriate. The tendency is to abstract
parts of the theory from the whole, which results in distorted
understandings and applications. As more educators become
aware of the broad scope of sociocultural theory, they will
develop practical applications that will broaden and strengthen
this theoretical framework. Such a perspective offers exciting
opportunities for researchers and teachers as we face the challenges
of educating youth for the 21 st century.
CONCLUSION
A goal for sociocultural theorists is the sustained development
of methodological approaches to educational and psychological
research that focus on process and provide ways of documenting
change and transformation. In this article we presented
a sociocultural approach to learning and development
and implications for classroom learning and teaching. An
emerging theme in both theory and practice is the collaborative
and transformative way in which knowledge is coconstructed.
We focused on three central tenets from Vygotsky’s
complex legacy—social sources of individual development,
semiotic mediation, and genetic analysis—and presented an
argument for viewing learning as distributed, interactive,
contextual, and the result of the learners’ participation in a
community of practice.
Our aim was to weave together some of Vygotsky’s key
ideas with pressing, contemporary concerns, particularly the
need to shape educational institutions to deliver instruction
that meets the needs of all students, especially the linguistically
and culturally diverse who historically have been marginalized
by traditional models of pedagogy. We believe a
sociocultural point of view provides a deeper understanding
of both the possibilities for and the problematic nature of
educational reform. Because educational institutions are a
part of and reflect the larger social system in which they are
situated, a proposal for substantial reform would have to
consider economic, political, historical, social, and cultural
factors. Although such an analysis was not the intent of this
article, we believe a concept we presented—the socially
structured interdependence of teaching and research, theory
construction, and educational intervention—provides a starting
point for local reform initiatives, such as those in Brazil
described previously.
In the sociocultural framework, notions of community and
participation were applied primarily to novice learners. The
applications of these notions to adults to study the dynamics
of collaboration and the interdependence of individual and
social processes are areas for further practical and theoretical
development. Social constructivist frameworks, although not
necessarily contradictory to sociocultural ones, focus more on
the possibilities for change within the individual child;
whereas sociocultural theoretical perspectives, as they develop
and are applied to educational systems, look at change
at different levels of analysis and organization. Central to the
task of educators and psychologists is conceiving of our work
as a system rather than as a set of isolated activities. The
sociocultural perspective can only thrive with the continued,
and at times discordant, articulation of the many voices of this
thought community.
REFERENCES
Bakhurst, D. (1995). On the social constitution of mind: Bruner, Ilyenkov,
and the defence of cultural psychology. Mind, Culture, and Activity,
2,158-171.
Belenky, M. F., Clinchy, B. M., Goldberger, N. R., & Tarule, J. M. (1986).
Women’s ways of knowing: The development of self, voice, and mind.
New York: Basic Books.
Brown, A. L. (1992). Design experiments: Theoretical and methodological
challenges in creating complex interventions in classroom settings.
Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141-178.
Brown, A. L„ Ash, D., Rutherford, M., Nakagawa, K., Gordon, A., &
Campione, J. C. (1993). Distributed expertise in the classroom. In G.
Salomon (Ed.), Distributed cognitions: Psychological and educational
considerations (pp. 188-228). New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Bruner, J. (1962). Introduction. In L. S. Vygotsky, Thought and language
(pp. v-x). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Calkins, L. M. (1986). The art of teaching writing. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
Cazden, C. (1988). Classroom discourse, Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
Cazden, C. (1993). Vygotsky, Hymes. and Bakhtin: From word to utterance
and voice. In E. A. Forman, N. Minick, & C. A. Stone (Eds.), Contexts
for learning: Sociocultural dynamics in children’s development (pp.
197-212). New York: Oxford University Press.
Chang-Wells, G. L. M., & Wells, G. (1993). Dynamics of discourse:
Literacy and the construction of knowledge. In E. A. Forman, N.
Miniek, & C. A. Stone (Eds.). Contexts for learning: Sociocultural
dynamics in children’s development (pp. 58-90). New York: Oxford
University Press.
Clay, M. M., & Cazden, C. B. (1990). A Vygotskian interpretation of Reading
Recovery. In L. C. Moll (Ed.), Vygotsky and education: Instructional
A VYGOTSKIAN FRAMEWORK 205
implications of sociohistorical psychology (pp. 206-222). New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Cobb, P., Wood, T., & Yackel, E. (1993). Discourse, mathematical thinking,
and classroom practice. In E. A. Forman, N. Minick, & C. A. Stone
(Eds.), Contexts for learning: Sociocultural dynamics in children’s
development (pp. 91-119). New York: Oxford University Press.
Cole, M. (1990). Cognitive development and formal schooling: The evidence
from cross-cultural research. In L. C. Moll (Ed.), Vygotsky and education:
Instructional implications of sociohistorical psychology (pp.
89-110). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Cole, M. (1995). Cultural-historical psychology: A meso-genetic approach.
In L. M. W. Martin, K. Nelson, & E. Tobach (Eds,), Sociocultural
psychology: Theory and practice of doing and knowing (pp. 168-204).
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Cole, M. (1996). April 28 contribution to LISTSERV xmca@weber.ucsd.
http://communication.ucsd.edu/MCA/Mail/Mail-april 96
Cole, M., & Engeström, Y. (1993). A cultural-historical approach to distributed
cognition. In G. Salomon (Ed.), Distributed cognitions: Psychological
and educational considerations (pp. 1-46). New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Cole, M., & Scribner, S. (1974). Culture and thought: A psychological
introduction. New York: Wiley.
Cole, M., & Scribner, S. (1978). Introduction. In M. Cole, V. John-Steiner, S.
Scribner, & E. Souberman (Eds.),Vygotsky, L. S., Mind in society: The
development of higher psychological processes (pp. 1-16). Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Damon, W„ & Phelps, E. (1989). Critical distinctions among three approaches
to peer education. International Journal of Educational Research, 13,9-19.
Diaz, R. M. (1992). Methodological concerns in the study of private speech.
In R. M. Diaz & L. E. Berk (Eds.), Private speech: From social interaction
to self-regulation (pp. 55-81). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, Inc.
Emig, J. (1971). The composing processes of twelfth graders. Urbana, IL:
National Council of Teachers of English.
Engeström, Y. (1987). Learning by expanding. An activity-theoretical approach
to developmental research. Helsinki, Finland: Orienta-Konsultit.
Engeström, Y. (1990). Learning, working and imagining: Twelve studies in
activity theory. Helsinki, Finland: Orienta-Konsultit.
Engeström, Y. (1994). Teachers as collaborative thinkers: Activity-theoretical
study of an innovative teacher team, in I. Carlgren, G. Handal, & S.
Vaage (Eds,), Teachers' minds and actions: Research on teachers’
thinking and, practice (43-61). Bristol, PA: Falmer.
Falmagne, R. J. (1995). The abstract and the concrete. In L. M. W. Martin, K.
Nelson, & B. Tobach (Eds.), Sociocultural psychology: Theory and
practice of doing and knowing (pp. 205-228). New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Forman, E. A., & McPhail, J. (1993). Vygotskian perspective on children’s
collaborative problem-solving activities. In E. A. Forman, N. Minick, & C.
A. Stone (Eds.), Contexts for learning: Sociocultural dynamics in children ’s
development (pp. 213-229). New York: Oxford University Press.
Frauenglass, M. H., & Diaz, R. M. (1985). Self-regulatory functions of
children’s private speech: A critical analysis of recent challenges to
Vygotsky’s theory. Developmental Psychology, 21, 357-364.
Freire, P. (1970). Pedagogy of the oppressed. New York: Continuum.
Gallimore, R., & Goldenberg, C. (1993). Activity settings of early literacy:
Home and school factors in children’s emergent literacy. In E. A. Forman,
N. Minick, & C. A. Stone (Eds.), Contexts for learning: Sociocultural
dynamics it; children’s development (pp. 315-335). New York: Oxford
University Press.
Gallimore, R., & Tharp, R. (1990). Teaching mind in society: Teaching,
schooling, and literate discourse. In L, C. Moll (Ed.), Vygotsky and
education: Instructional implications of sociohistorical psychology (pp.
175-205). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Gee, J. (1989). What is literacy? Journal (ftEducation, 171, 18-25.
Gee, J. (1991). Socio-cultural approaches to literacy (literacies). Annual
Review of Applied Linguistics, 12, 31—48.
Gindis, B. (1995). The social/cultural implication of disability: Vygotsky’s
paradigm for special education. Educational Psychologist,
30, 77-82.
Goodman, K. (1975). Acquiring literacy is natural: Who skilled Cock Robin? In
F. Gollasch (Ed.), Language & literacy: The selected writings of Kenneth
S. Goodman (Vol. 2, pp. 243-249). London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Goodman, K., & Goodman, Y. (1979). Learning to read is natural. In L.
Resnick & P. Weaver (Eds.), Theory and practice of early reading
(Vol. 1, 137-154). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Graves, D. H. (1983). Writing: Teachers & children at work. Portsmouth, NH:
Heinemann.
Heath, S. Bí. (1983). Ways with words: Language, life, and work in communities
and classrooms. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Hiebert, E. H. (1991). Introduction. In E. H. Hiebert (Ed.), Literacy for a
diverse society: Perspectives, practices, and policies (pp. 1-6). New
York: Teachers College Press.
John-Steiner, V. (1985). Notebooks of the mind: Explorations in thinking. New
York: Harper & Row.
John-Steiner, V. (1991). Cognitive pluralism: A Whorfian analysis. In B.
Spolsky & R. Cooper (Eds.), Festschrift in honor of Joshua Fishman’s
65th birthday (pp. 61-74). The Hague, Netherlands: Mouton.
John-Steiner, V. (1995). Cognitive pluralism: A sociocultural approach. Mind,
Culture, and Activity, 2,2-10.
John-Steiner, V. (1996, February). Creativity and collaboration in knowledge
construction. Paper presented ait the National Council of Teachers of
English Assembly on Research. Vygotsky Centennial: Vygotskian Perspectives
on Literacy and Research, Chicago, IL.
John-Steiner, V., & Österreich, H. (1975). Learning styles among Pueblo
children (NIE Research Grant, Final Report). Albuquerque: University
of New Mexico, Department of Educational Foundations.
John-Steiner, V., & Panofsky, C. P. (1992). Narrative competence: Cross-cultural
comparisons. Journal of Narrative and Life History, 2, 219-233.
John-Steiner, V., Panofsky, C. P., & Smith, L. W. (1994). Sociocultural
approaches to language and literacy: An interactionist perspective. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
John-Steiner, V., & Souberman, E. (1978). Afterword. In M. Cole, V. John-
Steiner, S. Scribner, & E. Souberman (Eds.), Vygotsky, L. S., Mind in
society: The development of higher psychological processes (120-133).
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
John-Steiner, V., & Tatter, P. (1983). An interactionist model of language
development. In B. Bain (Ed.), The sociogenesis of language and human
conduct (pp. 79-97). New York: Plenum.
Jordan, C., Tharp, R. G., & Vogt, L. (1985). Compatibility of classroom and
culture: General principles with Navajo and Hawaiian incidents. (Working
paper). Honolulu, HI: Kamehameha Schools/Bishop Estate, Center
for Development of Early Education.
Kozulin, A. (1990). Vygotsky’s psychology: A biography of ideas. Brighton,
UK: Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Langer, J. A. (1991). Literacy and scfiooling: A sociocognitive perspective. In
E. H. Hiebert (Ed.), Literacy for a diverse society: Perspectives, practices,
and policies (pp. 7-27). New York: Teachers College Press.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral
participation. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Leinhardt, G. (1996, April). Focusing on knowledge systems for teaching.
Paper presented at the annual conference of the American Educational
Research Association, New York.
Lemke, J. L. (1995). Textual politics, discourse and social dynamics. London:
Taylor & Francis.
Leontiev, A. N. (1977). The dialectical method in the psychology of memory.
Soviet Psychology, I, 53-69.
Leontiev, A. N. (1978). Activity, consciousness, and personality. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Leontiev, A. N. (1981). Problems of the development of mind. Moscow:
Progress Publishers.
Luria, A. (1973). The working brain: An introduction to neuropsychology.
New York: Basic Books.
206 JOHN-STEINER AND MAHN
Luna, A. (1979). The making of mind. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Mahn, H. (1992). ESL students and the reading and writing processes: An
attitudinal profile. Unpublished master’s thesis, California State University,
Los Angeles.
McCulIom, P. (1991). Cross-cultural perspectives on classroom discourse
and literacy. In E. H. Hiebert (Ed.), Literacy for a diverse society:
Perspectives, practices, and policies (pp. 108-121). New York: Teachers
College Press.
McLane, J. B. (1990). Writing as a social process. In L. C. Moll (Ed.),
Vygotsky and education: Instructional implications of sociohistorical
psychology (pp. 304-318). New York: Cambridge University Press.
McNamee, G. D. (1990). Learning to read and write in an inner-city
setting: A longitudinal study of community change. In L. C. Moll
(Ed.), Vygotsky and education: Instructional implications of sociohistorical
psychology (pp. 287-302). New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Minnis, M. (1994). Towatd a definition of law school readiness, ln V.
John-Steiner, C. P. Panofsky, & L. W. Smith (Eds.), Sociocultural
approaches to language and literacy: An interactionist perspective (pp.
347-390). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Moll, L. C. (1992). Literacy research in community and classrooms: A
sociocultural approach. In R. Beach, J. L. Green, M. L. Kamil, & T.
Shanahan (Eds.), Multidisciplinary perspectives on literacy research
(pp. 211-244). Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of English.
Moll, L. C., & Greenberg: J. B. (1990). Creating zones of possibilities:
Combining social contexts for instruction. InL. C. Moll (Ed.), Vygotsky
and education: Instructional implications of sociohistorical psychology
(pp. 319-348). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Moll, L. C., & Whitmore, K. F. (1993). Vygotsky in classroom practice:
Moving from individual transmission to social transaction. In E. A.
Forman, N. Minick, & C. A. Stone (Eds.), Contexts for learning:
Sociocultural dynamics in children’s development (pp. 19-42). New
York: Oxford University Press.
Murray D. M. ( 1985). A writer teaches writing. (2nd ed.). Boston: Houghton
Mifflin.
Newman, D., Griffin, P., & Cole, M. (1989). The construction zone: Working
for cognitive change in schools. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University
Press.
Nicolopoulou, A., & Cole, M. (1993). Generation and transmission of shared
knowledge in the culture of collaborative learning: The Fifth Dimension,
its play-world, and its institutional contexts. In E. A. Forman, N.
Minick, & C. A. Stone (Eds.), Contexts for learning: Sociocultural
dynamics in children’s development (pp. 283-314). New York: Oxford
University Press.
Olson, D. ( 1977). From utterance to text: The bias of language in speech and
writing. Harvard Education Review, 47,257-281.
Packer, M. (1993). Away from internalization. In E. A. Forman, N. Minick, & C.
A. Stone (Eds.), Contexts for learning: Sociocultural dynamics in children’s
development (pp. 254-265). New York: Oxford University Press.
Palincsar, A. M„ Brown, A. L., & Campione, J. C. (1993). First-grade
dialogues for knowledge acquisition and use. In E. A. Forman, N.
Minick, & C. A. Stone (Eds.), Contexts for learning: Sociocultural
dynamics in children’s development (pp. 43-57). New York: Oxford
University Press.
Panofsky, C. P. (1994). Developing the representational functions of language:
The role of parent-child book-reading activity. In V. John-Ste-
iner, C. P. Panofsky, & L. W. Smith (Eds.), Sociocultural approaches
to language and literacy: An interactionist perspective (pp. 223-242).
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Penuel, W. R., & Wertsch, J, V. (1995). Vygotsky and identity formation: A
sociocultural approach. Educational Psychologist, 30, 83-92.
Rogoff, Б. (1990). Apprenticeship in thinking. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Rogoff, В. (1991). Guidance and participation in spatial planning. In L. B.
Resnick, J. M. Levine, & S. B. Teasley (Eds.), Perspectives on socially
shared cognition (pp. 349-364). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.
Rogoff, В. (1994). Developing understanding of the idea of communities of
learners. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 1, 209-229.
Rogoff, В., Radziszewska, В., & Mastello, T. (1995). Analysis of developmental
processes in sociocultural activity. In L. M. W. Martin, K.
Nelson, & E. Tobach (Eds.), Sociocultural psychology: Theory and
practice of doing and knowing ( p p . 125-149) . New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Scinto, L. F. M. (1986). Written language and psychological development.
Orlando, FL: Academic.
Scribner, S., & Cole, M. (1981 ). The psychology of literacy. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Slavin, R. E. G983). When does cooperative learning increase student
achievement? Psychological Bulletin, 94, 429-445.
Slavin, R. E. ( 1987). Developmental and motivational perspectives on cooperative
learning: A reconciliation. Child Development, 58, 1161-1167.
Souza Lima, E. (1995). Culture revisited: Vygotsky’s ideas in Brazil. Anthropology
A Education Quarterly, 26, 443-458.
Staton, J., Shuy, R., Peyton, J. K.. & Reed, L. (1988). Dialogue journal
communication: Classroom, linguistic, social, and cognitive views.
Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Tharp, R. G., & Gallimore, R. (1988). Rousing mitais to life: Teaching
and learning in social context. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Tobach, E. (1995). The uniqueness of human labor. In L. M. W. Martin, K.
Nelson, & E. Tobach (Eds.), Sociocultural psychology: Thcoty and
practice of doing and knowing (pp. 43-66). New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Tudge, J., & Rogofí, В. (1989). Peer influences on cognitive development:
Piagetian and Vygotskian perspectives. In M. Bomstein & J. Bruner
(Eds.), Interaction in human development (pp. 17-40). Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Vaisinei', J. (1987). Culture and the development of children’s action: A
cultural-historical theory of development. Chichester, UK: Wiley.
van der Veer, R„ & Voisiner, J. (1991). Understanding Vygotsky: A quest for
synthesis. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological
processes. (M. Cole, V. John-Steiner. S. Scribner, & E. Sohber-
man, Eds.). Cambridge. MA: Harvard University Press.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1981). The instrumental method in psychology. In J. V.
Wertsch (Ed.), The concept of activity in Soviet psychology (pp.
134-144). Arntonk, NY: Sharpe.
Vygolsky, L. S. (1986). Thought and language. (A. Kozulin, Ed.). Cambridge,
МА; MIT Press.
Weber, R. J. (1992). Forks, phonographs, and hot air balloons. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Wertsch, J. V. (1985). Vygotsky and the socialformation of mind. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Wertsch. J. V. (1991). Voices of the mind: A sociocultural approach to
mediated action. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Wertsch, .1. (1994). Mediated action in sociocultural studies. Mind, Culture,
and Activity, 1,202-208.
Wertsch, J. V., & Slone, C. A. (1985). The concept of internalization in
Vygotsky's account of the genesis of higher mental functions. In J. V.
Weitsch (Ed.), Culture, communication, and cognition: Vygotskian
perspectives (pp. 162-179). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Wood, D. J., Bruner, J. S., & Ross, G. (1976). The role of tutoring in problem
solving. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 17(2), 89-100.
Zebroski, J. T. ( 1994). Thinking through theory: Vygotskian perspectives on
the leaching of writing. Portsmouth. NH: Heinemann.
Zukow-Goldring. P.. & Ferko, K. R. (1994). An ecological approach to the
emergence of the lexicon: Socializing attention. In V. John-Steiner, C.
P. Panoľsky. & L. W. Smith (Ees.), Sociocultural approaches to language
and literacy: An interactionist perspective (pp. 170-190). New
York1 Cambridge University Press.
Copyright of Educational Psychologist is the property of Taylor & Francis Ltd and its content may not be
copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written
permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.