Fragment of Vygotsky’s note
first suggesting mediation as the
basis of higher psychological
processes. ( “NB. The essence of
the instrumental method resides
in the functionally different use
of two stimuli, which differentially
determine behavior; from
this results the mastery of one’s
own psychological operations.
Always assuming two stimuli, we
must answer the following
questions: 1. How does one
remember stimulus Si with the
aid of stimulus S2 ( where Si is
the object and S2 is the instrument). 
2. How is attention
directed to Si with the aid of S2. 
3. How is a word associated
with Si retrieved via S2 and
L. S. VYGOTSKY
Mind in Society
The Development
of Higher
Psychological Processes
Edited by Michael Cole
Vera John-Steiner
Sylvia Scribner
Ellen Souberman
Harvard University Press
Cambridge, Massachusetts
London, England
Copyright © 1978 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College
All rights reserved
Printed in the United States of America
20 19 18 17 16 15 14
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Vygotskn, Lev Semenovich, 1896-1934. 
Mind in society.
Includes index. 
1. Cognition. 2. Cognition in children. 
I. Cole, Michael, 1938- II. Title. 
BF311.V93 1978 155.4Ί3 77-26023
ISBN 0-674-57629-2 (paper)
To the memory of
Alexander Romanovich Luria
Editors9 Preface
Lev Semyonovich Vygotsky has figured prominently in American
psychology since the publication in 1962 of his monograph Thought and
Language. Five years ago, at the urging of Vygotsky’s student Alexander
Luria, we agreed to edit a collection of Vygotsky’s essays which would
reflect the general theoretical enterprise of which the study of the relation
between thought and language was one important aspect. Luria
made available to us rough translations of two of Vygotsky’s works. The
first, ‘Tool and Symbol in Children’s Development" (1930), had never
been published. The second was a translation of a monograph entitled
The History of the Development of Higher Psychological Functions,
which appeared in the second volume of Vygotsky’s writings published
in Moscow in 1960. A cursory study of these essays quickly convinced us
that the scope of Vygotsky’s work reached considerably beyond Thought
and Language. Furthermore, we came to believe that the image of
Vygotsky as a sort of early neobehaviorist of cognitive development—an
impression held by many of our colleagues—was strongly belied by these
two works. 
We have constructed the first four chapters of this volume from
“Tool and Symbol.” The fifth chapter summarizes the major theoretical
and methodological points made in “Tool and Symbol” and applies them
to a classic problem in cognitive psychology, the nature of choice reaction. 
This chapter was taken from section 3 of The History of the Development
of Higher Psychological Functions. Chapters 6 and 8 (learning
and development, and the developmental precursors of writing) are
from a posthumously published collection of essays entitled Mental Development
of Children and the Process of Learning ( 1935). Chapter 7,
tx
Editors’ Preface
on play, is based on a lecture delivered at the Leningrad Pedagogical
Institute in 1933 and published in Voprosi Psikhologii (Problems of Psychology)
in 1966. Complete references are given in the list of Vygotsky’s
works that follows the text of this volume. 
At several places we have inserted material from additional sources
in order to more fully explicate the meaning of the text. In most cases
these importations are from sections of The History of the Development
of Higher Psychological Functions other than the one included here; the
rest are taken from other essays which appear in either the 1956 or the
1960 volumes of collected works. In a few cases passages have been taken
from the work of Vygotsky’s students or collaborators which provide
concrete examples of experimental procedures or results which the original
text describes with extreme brevity. References to these sources are
given in the notes. 
In putting separate essays together we have taken significant liberties. 
The reader will encounter here not a literal translation of Vygotsky
but rather our edited translation of Vygotsky, from which we have
omitted material that seemed redundant and to which we have added
material that seemed to make his points clearer. As other editors have
noted, Vygotsky’s style is extremely difficult. He wrote copiously and
many of his manuscripts have never been properly edited. In addition,
during frequent periods of illness he would dictate his papers—a practice
which resulted in repetitions and dense or elliptical prose. Caps in
the original manuscripts make them even less accessible now than they
might have been at the time they were written. Because proper references
were rarely given, we have supplied our best guess as to the exact
sources to which Vygotsky referred. The process of tracking down and
reading these sources has itself proved a very rewarding enterprise;
many of his contemporaries were fascinatingly modern in important
respects. We realize that in tampering with the original we may have
distorted history; however, we hope that by stating our procedures and
by adhering as closely as possible to the principles and content of the
work, we have not distorted Vygotsky’s meaning. 
We owe a special debt to the late Alexander R. Luria for providing
an initial translation of much of the material included in chapters 1-5,
for tirelessly tracking down references and expanding upon details of
experiments, and for reading our manuscript. Chapters 6 and 7 were
translated by Martin Lopez-Morillas. Chapter 5 and parts of chapters
1-5 were translated by Michael Cole. We wish to thank James Wertsch
for his assistance in translating and interpreting especially difficult passages. 
Editora’ Proface
The editing ot these writings has occupied us for several years. 
Working in separate locations, educated in differing intellectual traditions,
each team of editors found certain material of special interest. 
Since there is not one but many issues to be illuminated by such a complex
body of thought, we have written two essays reflecting various
aspects of "reading Vygotsky.”
Vera John-Steiner
Ellen Souberman
University of New Mexico
Michael Cole
Sylvia Scribner
The Rockefeller University
Contents
Introduction 1
Michael Cole and Sylvia Scribner
Biographical Note on L. S. Vygotsky 15
Basic Theory and Data
1. Tool ąnd Symbol in Child Development 19
2. The Development of Perception and Attention 31
3. Mastery of Memory and Thinking 38
4. Internalization of Higher Psychological Functions 52
5» Problems of Method 58
Educational Implications
6. Interaction between Learning and Development 79
7. The Role of Play in Development 92
8. The Prehistory of Written Language 105
Afterword 121
Vera John-Steiner and Ellen Souberman
Notes 135
Vygotsky’s Works 141
Index 153
The spider carries out operations reminiscent of a weaver and the
boxes which bees build in the sky could disgrace the work of many
architects. But even the worst architect differs from the most able bee
from the very outset in that before he builds a box out of boards he
has already constructed it in his head. At the end of the work process
he obtains a result which already existed in his mind before he began
to build. The architect not only changes the form given to him by
nature, within the constraints imposed by nature, he also carries out
а рифове of his own which defines the means and the character of
the activity to which he must subordinate his will. 
Karl Marx, Capital
It is precisely the alteration of nature by men, not nature as such,
which is the most essential and immediate basis of human thought. 
Friedrich Engels, Dialectics of Nature
Introduction
MICHAEL COLE AND SYLVIA SCRIBNER
Educated as a lawyer and philologist, Lev S. Vygotsky had already
made several contributions to literary criticism when he began his
career as a psychologist following the Russian Revolution in 1917. He
was a student in the heyday of Wilhelm Wundt, the founder of experimental
psychology, and William James, the American pragmatist. His
scientific contemporaries included Ivan Pavlov, Vladimir Bekhterev,
and John B. Watson, popularizers of stimulus-response theories of
behavior, as well as Wertheimer, Kohler, Koffka, and Lewin, the founders
of the Gestalt psychology movement. The reader might expect,
then, that Vygotsky’s work will prove to be primarily of historical
interest—perhaps as a glimpse of the way in which modem psychology’s
founding fathers influenced Soviet psychology in postrevolutionary
Russia. These essays are certainly of interest from the perspective of
intellectual history, but they are not historical relics. Rather, we offer
them as a contribution to quandaries and discussions in contemporary
psychology. 
In order to understand how the ideas in this volume can retain their
relevance across the reaches of time and culture that separate us from
Vygotsky, we have repeatedly found ourselves reflecting upon the state
of European psychology which provided the initial setting for Vygotsky’s
theories. We have also found it helpful to examine the condition of
psychology and society in postrevolutionary Russia, since they were the
source of the immediate problems facing Vygotsky as well as a source
of inspiration as he and his colleagues sought to develop a Marxist
theory of human intellectual functioning. 
1
Introduction
2
NINETEENTH-CENTURY BEGINNINGS
Until the latter half of the nineteenth century the study of mans
nature was the province of philosophy. The intellectual descendants of
John Locke in England had developed his empiricist explanation of
mind, which emphasized the origin of ideas from environmentally
produced sensations. The major problem of psychological analysis for
these British empiricists was to describe the laws of association by
which simple sensations combine to produce complex ideas. On the
continent the followers of Immanuel Kant argued that ideas of space
and time and concepts of quantity, quality, and relation originate in the
human mind and cannot be decomposed into simpler elements. Neither
side budged from its armchair. Both of these philosophical traditions
were operating under the assumption, dating from the work of René
Descartes, that the scientific study of man could apply only to his
physical body. To philosophy was assigned the study of his soul. 
While the conflict between these two approaches reaches down to
the present day, in the 1860s the terms of this discussion were changed
irrevocably by the almost simultaneous publication of three books. Most
famous was Darwin’s Origin of Species, which argued the essential
continuity of man and other animals. One immediate consequence of
this assertion was an effort by many scholars to establish discontinuities
that set human adults off from their lower relatives (both ontogenetically
and phylogenetically). The second book was Gustav Fechner’s Die
Psychophysik, which provided a detailed, mathematically sophisticated
description of the relation between changes in specifiable physical
events and verbalizable “psychic” responses. Fechner claimed no less
than an objective, quantitative description of the contents of the human
mind. The third book was a slim volume entitled Reflexes of the Brain,
written by a Moscow physician, I. M. Sechenov. Sechenov, who had
studied with some of Europe’s leading physiologists, had advanced
understanding of simple sensory-motor reflexes by using techniques that
isolated nerve-muscle preparations from the living organism. Sechenov
was convinced that the processes he observed in the isolated tissue of
frogs were the same in principle as those that take place in the central
nervous systems of intact organisms, including humans. If responses of
leg muscles could be accounted for by processes of inhibition and excitation,
might not the same laws apply to the operations of the human
cerebral cortex? Although he lacked direct evidence for these speculations,
Sechenov’s ideas suggested the physiological basis for linking
the natural scientific study of animals with the heretofore philosophical
Introduction
3
study of bumans. The tsar’s censor seemed to understand the revolutionary,
materialist implications of Sechenov’s thesis; he banned publication
of the book for as long as he could. When the book appeared, it
bore a dedication to Charles Darwin. 
These books by Darwin, Fechner, and Sechenov can be viewed as
essential constituents of psychological thought at the end of the nineteenth
century. Darwin linked animals and humans in a single conceptual
system regulated by natural laws; Fechner provided an example
of what a natural law describing the relationship between physical
events and human mental functioning might look like; Sechenov, extrapolating
from muscle twitches in frogs, proposed a physiological theory of
how such mental processes worked within the normally functioning
individual. None of these authors considered themselves (or were
considered by their contemporaries) to be psychologists. But they provided
the central questions with which the young science of psychology
became concerned in the second half of the century: What are the
relationships between animal and human behavior? Environmental
and mental events? Physiological and psychological processes? Various
schools of psychology attacked one or another of these questions,
providing partial answers within theoretically limited perspectives. 
The first such school was established by Wilhelm Wundt in 1880. 
Wundt took as his task the description of the contents of human consciousness
and their relation to external stimulation. His method consisted
of analyzing various states of consciousness into their constituent
elements, which he defined as simple sensations. On a priori grounds,
he ruled out such sensations as “feelings of awareness” or “perception
of relations” as elements of consciousness, considering these phenomena
to be “nothing more than” the by-product of faulty methods of observation
(introspection). Indeed, Wundt propounded the explicit view that
complex mental functions, or as they were then known, “higher psychological
processes” (voluntary remembering and deductive reasoning, for
example), could not in principle be studied by experimental psychologists. 
They could only be investigated, he maintained, by historical
studies of cultural products such as folktales, customs, and language. 
By the beginning of World War I introspective studies of human
conscious processes came under attack from two directions. In the
United States and Russia psychologists discontented with the controversies
surrounding the correct introspective descriptions of sensations,
and with the sterility of the research this position had produced, renounced
the study of consciousness in favor of the study of behavior. 
Exploiting the potential suggested by Pavlov’s study of conditioned
Introduction
4
reflexes (which built upon Sechenov) and Darwin’s assertion of the
continuity of man and beast, they opened up many areas of animal and
human behavior to scientific study. In one important respect, however,
they agreed with their introspective antagonists: their basic strategy
was to identify the simple building blocks of human activity (substituting
stimulus-response bonds for sensations) and then to specify the
rules by which these elements combined to produce more complex
phenomena. This strategy led to a concentration on processes shared
by animals and humans and, again, to a neglect of higher processes—
thought, language, and volitional behavior. The second line of attack
on descriptions of the contents of consciousness came from a group of
psychologists who objected to the one point upon which Wundt and
the behaviorists agreed: the appropriateness of analyzing psychological
processes into their basic constituents. This movement, which came to
be known as Gestalt psychology, demonstrated that many intellectual
phenomena (Kohler’s studies with anthropoid apes were an example)
and perceptual phenomena (Wertheimer’s studies of apparent movement
of flickering lights, for example) could not be accounted for in terms of
either the basic elements of consciousness postulated by Wundt or
simple stimulus-response theories of behavior. The Gestalt psychologists
rejected, in principle, the possibility of accounting for complex processes
in terms of simple ones. 
Such, in great brevity, was the situation in European psychology
when Vygotsky first appeared on the scene. The situation was not very
different in Russia. 
POSTREVOLUTIONARY PSYCHOLOGY IN RUSSIA
In the early decades of the twentieth century psychology in Russia,
as in Europe, was torn between contending schools, each of which
offered partial explanations of a limited range of phenomena. In 1923 at
the first all-Russian psychoneurological congress K. N. Kornilov initiated
the first major organizational and intellectual shift in psychology following
the revolution. At that time the prestigious Institute of Psychology
in Moscow was headed by G. I. Chelpanov, an adherent of Wundt’s
introspective psychology and a foe of behaviorism. (He had published
the sixth edition of his book, The Mind of Man, a critique of materialist
theories of the mind, in 1917, just before the revolution.) Chelpanov
assigned a restricted role to Marxism in psychology, asserting it could
help explain the social organization of consciousness but not the properties
of individual consciousness. In a talk entitled “Contemporary
Introduction
S
Psychology and Marxism” Kornilov criticized Chelpanov both for the
idealistic basis of his psychological theory and for the restricted role he
assigned to Marxism in psychology. Kornilov, who called his own approach
reactology, sought to subsume all branches of psychology within
a Marxist framework that used behavioral reactions as the basic data. 
Kornilov s critique of Chelpanov in 1923 won the day. Chelpanov
was removed as director of the Institute of Psychology and was replaced
by Kornilov, who immediately brought together a corps of young
scientists dedicated to formulating and promoting a behavioral, Marxist
theory of psychology. Vygotsky must have produced quite a sensation
one year later at the second psychoneurological meeting when he gave
a talk entitled “Consciousness as an Object of the Psychology of Behavior.”
Whatever else one extracted from Kornilov’s reactological
approach, it quite clearly did not feature the role of consciousness in
human activity, nor did it accord the concept of consciousness a role in
psychological science.1
Vygotsky was dissenting from newly established authority. He
was not, however, promoting a return to the position advocated by
Chelpanov. In his initial speech and a series of subsequent publications,
he made it clear that in his view none of the existing schools of psychology
provided a firm foundation for establishing a unified theory of
human psychological processes. Borrowing a phrase from his German
contemporaries, he often referred to the “crisis in psychology” and set
himself the task of achieving a synthesis of contending views on a
completely new theoretical basis. 
For Vygotsky’s Gestalt contemporaries, a crisis existed because
established theories (primarily Wundt’s and Watsonian behaviorism)
could not, in their view, explain complex perceptual and problem-
solving behaviors. For Vygotsky, the crisis went much deeper. He shared
the Gestalt psychologists’ dissatisfaction with psychological analysis
that began by reducing all phenomena to a set of psychological “atoms.”
But he felt that the Gestalt psychologists failed to move beyond the
description of complex phenomena to the explanation of them. Even if
one were to accept the Gestalt criticisms of previous approaches, a
crisis would still exist because psychology would remain split into two
irreconcilable halves: a “natural science” branch that could explain
elementary sensory and reflex processes, and a “mental science” half
that could describe emergent properties of higher psychological processes. 
What Vygotsky sought was a comprehensive approach that
would make possible description and explanation of higher psychological
functions in terms acceptable to natural science. To Vygotsky, explana-
Introduction
в
tion meant a great deal. It included identification of the brain mechanisms
underlying a particular function; it included a detailed explication
of their developmental history to establish the relation between simple
and complex forms of what appeared to be the same behavior; and,
importantly, it included specification of the societal context in which
the behavior developed. Vygotsky’s goals were extremely ambitious,
perhaps unreasonably so. He did not achieve these goals (as he was well
aware). But he did succeed in providing us with an astute and prescient
analysis of modern psychology. 
A major reason for the continued relevance of Vygotsky’s work is
that in 1924 and the following decade he constructed a penetrating
critique of the notion that an understanding of the higher psychological
functions in humans can be found by a multiplication and complication
of principles derived from animal psychology, in particular those principles
that represent the mechanical combination of stimulus-response
laws. At the same time he provided a devastating critique of theories
which claim that the properties of adult intellectual functions arise from
maturation alone, or are in any way preformed in the child and simply
waiting for an opportunity to manifest themselves. 
In stressing the social origins of language and thinking, Vygotsky
was following the lead of influential French sociologists, but to our
knowledge he was the first modern psychologist to suggest the mechanisms
by which culture becomes a part of each person’s nature. Insisting
that psychological functions are a product of the brain’s activity, he
became an early advocate of combining experimental cognitive psychology
with neurology and physiology. Finally, by claiming that all of
these should be understood in terms of a Marxist theory of the history of
human society, he laid the foundation for a unified behavioral science. 
MARXIST THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK
Contrary to the stereotype of Soviet scholars scurrying to make
their theories conform to the Politburo’s most recent interpretation of
Marxism, Vygotsky clearly viewed Marxist thought as a valuable scientific
resource from very early in his career. “A psychologically relevant
application of dialectical and historical materialism” would be one
accurate summary of Vygotsky’s sociocultural theory of higher mental
processes. 
Vygotsky saw in the methods and principles of dialectical materialism
a solution to key scientific paradoxes facing his contemporaries. A
central tenet of this method is that all phenomena be studied as processes
Introduction
7
in motion and in change. In terms of the subject matter of psychology,
the scientist’s task is to reconstruct the origin and course of development
of behavior and consciousness. Not only does every phenomenon have
its history, buř ŕhis history is characterized by changes both qualitative
(changes in form and structure and basic characteristics) and quantitative. 
Vygotsky applied this line of reasoning to explain the transformation
of elementary psychological processes into complex ones. The
schism between natural scientific studies of elementary processes and
speculative reflection on cultural forms of behavior might be bridged
by tracing the qualitative changes in behavior occuring in the course of
development. Thus, when Vygotsky speaks of his approach as “developmental,”
this is not to be confused with a theory of child development. 
The developmental method, in Vygotsky’s view, is the central method
of psychological science. 
Marx’s theory of society (known as historical materialism) also
played a fundamental role in Vygotsky’s thinking. According to Marx,
historical changes in society and material life produce changes in
“human nature” (consciousness and behavior). Although this general
proposition had been echoed by others, Vygotsky was the first to
attempt to relate it to concrete psychological questions. In this effort he
creatively elaborated on Engels’ concept of human labor and tool use
as the means by which man changes nature and, in so doing, transforms
himself. In chapters 1 through 4 below, Vygotsky exploits the concept of
a tool in a fashion that finds its direct antecedents in Engels: “The
specialization of the hand—this implies the tool, and the tool implies
specific human activity, the transforming reaction of man on nature”;2
“the animal merely uses external nature, and brings about changes in it
simply by his presence; man, by his changes, makes it serve his ends,
masters it. This is the final, essential distinction between man and other
animals” (p. 291). Vygotsky brilliantly extended this concept of mediation
in human-environment interaction to the use of signs as well as tools. 
Like tool systems, sign systems (language, writing, number systems) are
created by societies over the course of human history and change with
the form of society and the level of its cultural development. Vygotsky
believed that the internalization of culturally produced sign systems
brings about behavioral transformations and forms the bridge between
early and later forms of individual development. Thus for Vygotsky,
in the tradition of Marx and Engels, the mechanism of individual
developmental change is rooted in society and culture. 
In later chapters (especially chapter 5) Vygotsky generalizes his
conception of the origin of higher psychological functions in a way that
Introduction
8
reveals the close relationship between their fundamentally mediated
nature and the dialectical, materialist conception of historical change. 
Citations of Marxist classics were sometimes used to excess by
certain Soviet psychologists as they sought a means for building a Marxist
psychology from the chaos of competing schools of thought. Yet
in unpublished notes Vygotsky repudiated the “quotation method” of
relating Marxism to psychology and made explicit the way in which he
thought its basic methodological principles might contribute to theory-
building in psychology:
I don’t want to discover the nature of mind by patching together a lot of
quotations. I want to find out how science has to be built, to approach
the study of the mind having learned the whole of Marx’s method. 
... In order to create such an enabling theory-method in the generally
accepted scientific manner, it is necessary to discover the essence of
the given area of phenomena, the laws according to which they change,
their qualitative and quantitative characteristics, their causes. It is
necessary to formulate the categories and concepts that are specifically
relevant to them—in other words, to create one’s own Capital. 
The whole of Capital is written according to the following method: Marx
analyzes a single living “cell” of capitalist society—for example, the
natine of value. Within this cell he discovers the structure of the entire
system and all of its economic institutions. He says that to a layman this
analysis may seem a murky tangle of tiny details. Indeed, there may be
tiny details, but they are exactly those which are essential to “microanatomy.”
Anyone who could discover what a “psychological” cell is—
the mechanism producing even a single response—would thereby find
the key to psychology as a whole, [from unpublished notebooks]
A careful reading of this manuscript provides convincing proof of
both Vygotsky’s sincerity and the fruitfulness of the framework he
developed. 
THE INTELLECTUAL AND SOCIAL SETTING
Developmental and historical approaches to the study of human
nature were not unique to Vygotsky in the Soviet Union in the 1920s. 
Within psychology, an older colleague, P. P. Blonsky, had already
adopted the position that an understanding of complex mental functions
requires developmental analysis.3 From Blonsky Vygotsky adopted the
notion that “behavior can be understood only as the history of behavior.”
Blonsky was also an early advocate of the view that the technological
activities of people were a key to understanding their psychological
makeup, a view that Vygotsky exploited in great detail. 
Introduction
9
Vygotsky and many other Soviet theorists of the day were ako
heavily influenced by the work of western European sociologists and
anthropologists, like Thumwald and Levy-Bruhl,4 who were interested
in the history of mental processes as reconstructed from anthropological
evidence of the intellectual activity of primitive peoples. The scant
references in this book are a pale reflection of the extent of Vygotsky’s
interest in the development of mental processes understood historically. 
This aspect of his work received special attention in a publication
titled Studies in the History of Behavior published jointly with A. R. 
Luria in 1930. It served as the impetus for Luria’s two expeditions to
Central Asia in .1931 and 1932, the results of which were published
long after Vygotsky’s death.5
This historical emphasis was also popular in Soviet linguistics,
where interest centered on the problem of the origin of language and its
influence on the development of thought. Discussions in linguistics dealt
with concepts similar to Vygotsky’s and also similar to the work of Sapir
and Whorf, who were then becoming influential in the United States. 
While an acquaintance with academic issues of the 1930s is helpful
to understanding Vygotsky’s approach to human cognition, a consideration
of sociopolitical conditions during this time in the Soviet Union is
essential as well. Vygotsky worked within a society that put a premium
on science and had high hopes for the ability of science to solve the
pressing economic and social problems of the Soviet people. Psychological
theory could not be pursued apart from the practical demands
made on scientists by the government, and the broad spectrum of Vygotsky’s
work clearly shows his concern with producing a psychology that
would have relevance for education and medical practice. For Vygotsky,
the need to carry on theoretical work in an applied context posed no
contradiction whatsoever. He had begun his career as a teacher of literature,
and many of his early articles had dealt with problems of educational
practice, especially education of the mentally and physically
handicapped. He had been a founder of the Institute of Defectology in
Moscow, with which he was associated throughout his working life. In
such medical problems as congenital blindness, aphasia, and severe
mental retardation Vygotsky saw opportunities both for understanding
the mental processes of all people and for establishing programs of
treatment and remediation. Thus, it was consistent with his general
theoretical view that his work should be carried out in a society that
sought the elimination of illiteracy and the founding of educational
programs to maximize the potential of individual children. 
Vygotsky’s participation in the debates surrounding the formulation
Introduction
10
of a Marxist psychology embroiled him in fierce disputes in the late
1920s and early 1930s. In these discussions ideology, psychology, and
policy were intricately intertwined, as different groups vied for the
right to represent psychology. With Kornilov s ouster from the Institute
of Psychology in 1930, Vygotsky and his students were for a brief time in
the ascendancy, but he was never recognized as the official leader. 
In the years just prior to his death Vygotsky lectured and wrote
extensively on problems of education, often using the term “pedology,”
which roughly translates as “educational psychology.” In general
he was scornful of pedology that emphasized tests of intellectual ability
patterned after the IQ tests then gaining prominence in western Europe
and the United States. It was his ambition to reform pedology along
the lines suggested in chapter 6 in this volume, but his ambition far
exceeded his grasp. Vygotsky was mistakenly accused of advocating
mass psychological testing and criticized as a “Great Russian chauvinist”
for suggesting that nonliterate peoples (such as those living in
nonindustrialized sections of central Asia) had not yet developed the
intellectual capacities associated with modern civilization. Two years
following his death the Central Committee of the Communist Party
issued a decree halting all psychological testing in the Soviet Union. 
At the same time all leading psychological journals ceased publication
for almost twenty years. A period of intellectual ferment and experimentation
was at an end. 
But by no means did Vygotsky’s ideas die with him. Even before
his death he and his students established a laboratory in Kharkov headed
by A. N. Leontiev (currently Dean of the Psychology Faculty at Moscow
University) and later by A. V. Zaporozhets (now Director of the
Institute of Preschool Education). Luria completed his medical training
in the latter half of the 1930s and went on to carry out his world-
famous pioneering work in developmental and neuropsychology. Many
of Vygotsky’s former students hold leading positions in the Institute
of Defectology and the Institute of Psychology within the Soviet Academy
of Pedagogical Sciences, as well as university departments of psychology
such as that at Moscow University. 
As inspection of any compendium of Soviet psychological research
will show, Vygotsky continued and continues to influence research in
a wide variety of basic and applied areas related to cognitive processes,
their development and dissolution. His ideas have not gone unchallenged,
even by his students, but they remain a living part of Soviet
psychological thought. 
Introduction
U
VYGOTSKY’S USE OF THE EXPERIMENTAL METHOD
Vygotsky’s references in the text to experiments conducted in his
laboratory sometimes leave readers with a sense of unease. He presents
almost no raw data and summaries are quite general. Where are
the statistical tests that record whether or not observations reflect
“real” effects? What do these studies prove? Do they in fact lend any
support to Vygotsky’s general theories, or is he, in spite of his disclaimers,
conducting psychology in a speculative manner without subjecting
his central propositions to empirical test? Those steeped in the
methodology of experimental psychology as practiced in most American
laboratories may be inclined to withhold the term “experiment” from
Vygotsky’s studies and consider them to be little more than interesting
demonstrations or pilot studies. And so, in many respects, they were. 
We have found it useful to keep in mind the nature of the manuscripts
that are the basis of this book. They do not constitute a report of
a series of research studies from which general propositions are extrapolated. 
Rather, in these writings Vygotsky was concerned with presenting
the basic principles of his theory and method. He drew upon the
very limited pool of empirical work available to him in order to illustrate
and support these principles. The description of specific studies
is schematic and findings are often given as general conclusions rather
than as raw data. Some of the studies referred to have been published
in greater detail by his students and a few are available in English.®
Most studies, however, were conducted by students as pilot investigations
and were never prepared for publication. Vygotsky’s laboratory
existed for only a decade and his death from tuberculosis was expected
at any time. The implications of his theory were so many and varied,
and time was so short, that all energy was concentrated on opening up
new lines of investigation rather than pursuing any particular line to
the fullest. That task remained for Vygotsky’s students and their successors,
who adopted his views in varying ways, incorporating them into
new lines of research.7 However, the style of experimentation in these
essays represents more than a response to the urgent conditions in which
they were conducted. Vygotsky’s concept of the experiment differed
from that of American psychology, and understanding this difference is
important for an appreciation of Vygotsky’s contribution to contemporary
cognitive psychology. 
As every student of an introductory experimental course knows,
the purpose of an experiment as conventionally presented is to deter-
Introduction
12
mine the conditions controlling behavior. Methodology follows from
this objective: the experimental hypothesis predicts aspects of the stimulus
materials or task that will determine particular aspects of the response;
the experimenter seeks maximum control over materials, task,
and response in order to test the prediction. Quantification of responses
provides the basis for comparison across experiments and for drawing
inferences about cause-and-effect relationships. The experiment, in
short, is designed to produce a certain performance under conditions
that maximize its interpretability. 
For Vygotsky, the object of experimentation is quite different. The
principles of his basic approach (presented in chapter 5 of this volume)
do not stem from a purely methodological critique of established experimental
practices; they flow from his theory of the nature of higher
psychological processes and the task of scientific explanation in psychology. 
If higher psychological processes arise and undergo changes
in the course of learning and development, psychology will only fully
understand them by determining their origin and mapping their history. 
At first sight it would appear that such a task precludes the experimental
method and requires study of individual behavior over long periods of
time. But Vygotsky believed (and ingeniously demonstrated) that the
experiment could serve an important role by making visible processes
that are ordinarily hidden beneath the surface of habitual behavior. He
wrote that in a properly conceived experiment the investigator could
create processes that “telescope the actual course of development of a
given function.” He called this method of investigation the “experimental-genetic”
method, a term he shared with Heinz Werner, an outstanding
contemporary whose developmental, comparative approach
to psychology was well-known to Vygotsky. 
To serve as an effective means of studying “the course of development
of process,” the experiment must provide maximum opportunity
for the subject to engage in a variety of activities that can be observed,
not just rigidly controlled. One technique Vygotsky effectively used for
this purpose was to introduce obstacles or difficulties into the task that
disrupted routine methods of problem solving. For example, in studying
children’s communication and the function of egocentric speech
Vygotsky set up a task situation that required children to engage in cooperative
activity with others who did not share their language (foreignspeaking
or deaf children). Another method was to provide alternative
routes to problem solving, including a variety of materials (Vygotsky
called them “external aids”) that could be used in different ways to
satisfy the demands of the task. By careful observation of the uses made
Introduction
13
of these external aids by children at different ages under different conditions
of task difficulty, Vygotsky sought to reconstruct the series of
changes in intellectual operations that normally unfold during the
course of the child’s biographical development. A third technique was to
set a task before the child that exceeded his knowledge and abilities, in
order to discover the rudimentary beginnings of new skills. This procedure
is well illustrated in studies on writing (chapter 7), in which
young toddlers were provided with pencil and paper and asked to make
representations of events, thus disclosing to the investigator the child’s
earliest understanding of the nature of graphic symbolism. 
With all these procedures the critical data furnished by the experiment
is not performance level as such but the methods by which the performance
is achieved. The contrast between conventional experimental
work (focusing on performance) and Vygotsky’s work (focusing on
process) has its contemporary expression in recent studies on children’s
memory by American investigators. Many studies (including a number
of our own) have presented children of various ages with lists of words
to be remembered and have analyzed such performance measures as
number of words recalled and the order of recall. From these indicators
the investigators have sought to make inferences about whether or not,
and to what extent, young children engage in organizing activities as
a memory strategy. On the other hand, John Flavell and his colleagues,
using procedures very much like those of Vygotsky’s students, provided
children the materials to be remembered, and instructed them to do
whatever they wanted to help them remember. They then observed
children’s attempts at classifying the items, the kinds of grouping they
made, and other indices of children’s tendency to use organizational
strategies in remembering. As with Vygotsky, the central question is:
What are the children doing? How are they trying to satisfy task
demands?
In this connection we would like to clarify a basic concept of
Vygotsky’s theoretical approach and experimental method that we believe
has been widely misinterpreted. In several places in the text Vygotsky,
in referring to the structure of behavior, uses a term that we have
translated as “mediated.” Occasionally this term is accompanied by a figure
depicting a stimulus, a response, and a “mediating link” between
them (for example, S-X-R). The same term, and virtually the same diagram,
were introduced into American learning theory in the late 1930s
and became very popular in the 1950s as attempts were made to extend
stimulus-response theories of learning to complex human behavior,
especially language. It is important to keep in mind that Vygotsky was
Introduction
14
not a stimulus-response learning theorist and did not intend his idea
of mediated behavior to be thought of in this context. What he did
intend to convey by this notion was that in higher forms of human behavior,
the individual actively modifies the stimulus situation as a
part of the process of responding to it. It was the entire structure of this
activity which produced the behavior that Vygotsky attempted to denote
by the term “mediating.”
Several implications follow from Vygotsky’s theoretical approach
and method of experimentation. One is that experimental results will
be qualitative as well as quantitative in nature. Detailed descriptions,
based on careful observation, will constitute an important part of
experimental findings. To some, such findings may seem merely anecdotal;
Vygotsky maintained that if carried out objectively and with
scientific rigor, such observations have the status of validated fact. 
Another consequence of this new approach to experimentation is
to break down some of the barriers that are traditionally erected between
“laboratory” and “field.” Experimental interventions and observations
may often be as well or better executed in play, school, and
clinical settings than in the psychologist’s laboratory. The sensitive observations
and imaginative interventions reported in this book attest
to this possibility. 
Finally, an experimental method that seeks to trace the history of
the development of psychological functions sits more comfortably than
the classical method alongside other methods in the social sciences concerned
with history—including the history of culture and society as
well as the history of the child. To Vygotsky, anthropological and
sociological studies were partners with observation and experiment in
the grand enterprise of accounting for the progress of human conscious-,
ness and intellect. 
Biographical Note on
L. S. Vygotsky
Lev Semyonovitch Vygotsky was bom November 5, 1896, in the
town of Orsha, northeast of Minsk in Byelorussia. In 1913 he completed
gymnasium in Gomel with a gold medal. In 1917, after graduating from
Moscow University with a specialization in literature, he began his
literary research. 
From 1917 to 1923 Vygotsky taught literature ancfpsychology in a
school in Gomel, where he also directed the theater section of the adult
education center and gave many speeches and lectures on problems
of literature ‘ and science. During this period Vygotsky founded the
literary journal Verask. Here he published his first literary research, later
reissued as The Psychology of Art. He also founded a psychological
laboratory in the Teacher Training Institute, where he gave a course
on psychology, the contents of which were later published in Pedagogical
Psychology. 
In 1924 Vygotsky moved to Moscow and began to work first at the
Institute of Psychology and then in the Institute of Defectology, which
he founded. At the same time he directed a department for the education
of physically defective and mentally retarded children in Nar-
compros (Peoples Committee on Education), and taught courses in the
Krupskaya Academy of Communist Education, the Second Moscow
State University (later the Moscow State Pedagogical Institute), and
the Hertzen Pedagogical Institute in Leningrad. Between 1925 and 1934
Vygotsky gathered around him a large group of young scientists working
in the areas of psychology, defectology, and mental abnormality. 
An interest in medicine led Vygotsky simultaneously to undertake medical
training, first in the medical institute in Moscow and later in Kharkov,
15
Biographical Note
16
where he gave a psychology course in the Ukrainian Psychoneurological
Academy. Not long before his death Vygotsky was invited to head
the department of psychology in the All-Union Institute of Experimental
Medicine. He died of tuberculosis June 11, 1934. 
A. R. Luria
Part One / Mind in Society
Basic Theory
and Data
I
Tool and Symbol in
Child Development
The primary purpose of this book is to characterize the uniquely
human aspects of behavior, and to offer hypotheses about the way these
traits have been formed in the course of human history and the way
they develop over an individual’s lifetime. 
This analysis will be concerned with three fundamental issues: (1)
What is the relation between human beings and their environment,
both physical and social? (2) What new forms of activity were responsible
for establishing labor as the fundamental means of relating humans
to nature and what are the psychological consequences of these forms
of activity? (3) What is the nature of the relationship between the use
of tools and the development of speech? None of these questions has
been fully treated by scholars concerned with understanding animal
and human psychology. 
Karl Stumpf, a prominent German psychologist in the early years of
the twentieth century, based his studies on a set of premises completely
different from those I will employ here.1 He compared the study of
children to the study of botany, and stressed the botanical character of
development, which he associated with maturation of the whole organism. 
The fact is that maturation per se is a secondary factor in the development
of the most complex, unique forms of human behavior. The
development of these behaviors is characterized by complicated, qualitative
transformations of one form of behavior into another (or, as
Hegel would phrase it, a transformation of quantity into quality). The
conception of maturation as a passive process cannot adequately describe
these complex phenomena. Nevertheless, as A. Gesell has aptly
19
Mind in Society
20
pointed out, in our approaches to development we continue to use the
botanical analogy in our description of child development (for example,
we say that the early education of children takes place in a “kindergarten”).2
Recently several psychologists have suggested that this botanical
model must be abandoned. 
In response to this kind of criticism, modem psychology has
ascended the ladder of science by adopting zoological models as the
basis for a new general approach to understanding the development of
children. Once the captive of botany, child psychology is now mesmerized
by zoology. The observations on which these newer models
draw come almost entirely from the animal kingdom, and answers to
questions about children are sought in experiments carried out on
animals. Both the results of experiments with animals and the procedures
used to obtain these results are finding their way from the
animal laboratory into the nursery. 
This convergence of child and animal psychology has contributed
significantly to the study of the biological basis of human behavior. 
Many links between child and animal behavior, particularly in the
study of elementary psychological processes, have been established. But
a paradox has now emerged. When the botanical model was fashionable,
psychologists emphasized the unique character of higher psychological
functions and the difficulty of studying them by experimental means. 
But this zoological approach to the higher intellectual processes—those
processes that are uniquely human—has led psychologists to interpret
the higher intellectual functions as a direct continuation of corresponding
processes in animals. This style of theorizing is particularly apparent
in the analysis of practical intelligence in children, the most important
aspect of which concerns the child’s use of tools. 
PRACTICAL INTELLIGENCE IN ANIMALS
AND CHILDREN
The work of Wolfgang Köhler is particularly significant in the study
of practical intelligence.8 He conducted many experiments with apes
during World War I, and occasionally compared some of his observations
of chimpanzees’ behavior with particular kinds of responses in
children. This direct analogy between practical intelligence in the child
and similar response by apes became the guiding principle of experimental
work in the field. 
K. Buhler’s research also sought to establish similarities between
child and ape.4 He studied the way in which young children grasp ob-
Tool and Symbol in Child Development
21
jects, their ability to make detours while pursuing a goal, and the
manner in which they use primitive tools. These observations, as well
as his experiment in which a young child is asked to remove a ring from
a stick, illustrate an approach akin to Köhler s. Buhler interpreted the
manifestations of practical intelligence in children as being of exactly
the same type as those we are familiar with in chimpanzees. Indeed,
there is a phase in the life of the child that Buhler designated the
“chimpanzee age” (p. 48). One ten-month-old infant whom he studied
was able to pull a string to obtain a cookie that was attached to it. The
ability to remove a ring from a post by lifting it rather than trying to
pull it sideways did not appear until the middle of the second year.®
Although these experiments were interpreted as support for the analogy
between the child and apes, they also led Buhler to the important discovery,
which will be explicated in later sections, that the beginnings
of practical intelligence in the child (he termed it “technical thinking”),
as well as the actions of the chimpanzee, are independent of speech. 
Charlotte Buhler’s detailed observations of infants during their
first year of life gave further support to this conclusion.® She found the
first manifestations of practical intelligence took place at the very
young age of six months. However, it is not only tool use that develops
at this point in a child’s history but also systematic movement and
perception, the brain and hands—in fact, the child’s entire organism. 
Consequently, the child’s system of activity is determined at each specific
stage both by the chilďs degree of organic development and by his or
her degree of mastery in the use of tools. 
K. Buhler established the developmentally important principle that
the beginnings of intelligent speech are preceded by technical thinking,
and technical thinking comprises the initial phase of cognitive development. 
His lead in emphasizing the chimpanzee-like features of children’s
behavior has been followed by many others. It is in extrapolating this
idea that the dangers of zoological models and analogies between human
and animal behaviors find their clearest expression. The pitfalls are
slight in research that focuses on the preverbal period in the child’s
development, as Buhler’s did. However, he drew a questionable conclusion
from his work with very young children when he stated, “The
achievements of the chimpanzee are quite independent of language
and in the case of man, even in later life, technical thinking, or thinking
in terms of tools, is far less closely bound up with language and
concepts than other forms of thinking.”7
Buhler proceeded from the assumption that the relationship between
practical intelligence and speech that characterizes the ten-
Mind in Society
22
month-old child remains intact throughout her lifetime. This analysis
postulating the independence of intelligent action from speech runs
contrary to our own findings, which reveal the integration of speech
and practical thinking in the course of development. 
Shapiro and Gerke offer an important analysis of the development
of practical thinking in children based upon experiments modeled after
Kohler’s problem-solving studies with chimpanzees.8 They theorize
that children’s practical thinking is similar to adult thought in certain
respects and different in others, and emphasize the dominant role of
social experience in human development. In their view, social experience
exerts its effect through imitation; when the child imitates the way
adults use tools and objects, she masters the very principle involved
in a particular activity. They suggest that repeated actions pile up, one
upon another, as in a multi-exposure photograph; the common traits
become clear and the differences become blurred. The result is a crys-
talized scheme, a definite principle of activity. The child, as she becomes
more experienced, acquires a greater number of models that
she understands. These models represent, as it were, a refined cumulative
design of all similar actions; at the same time, they are also a rough
blueprint for possible types of action in the future. 
However, Shapiro and Gerke’s notion of adaptation is too firmly
linked to a mechanical conception of repetition. For them, social experience
serves only to furnish the child with motor schemas; they do
not take into account the changes occurring in the internal structure
of the child’s intellectual operations. In their descriptions of children’s
problem solving, the authors are forced to note the “specific role fulfilled
by speech” in the practical and adaptive efforts of the growing
child. But their description of this role is a strange one. “Speech,” they
say, “replaces and compensates for real adaptation; it does not serve as
a bridge leading to past experience but to a purely social adaptation
which is achieved via the experimenter.” This analysis does not allow
for the contribution speech makes to the development of a new structural
organization of practical activity. 
Guillaume and Meyerson offer a different conclusion regarding the
role of speech in the inception of uniquely human forms of behavior.9
From their extremely interesting experiments on tool use among apes,
they concluded that the methods used by apes to accomplish a given
task are similar in principle and coincide on certain essential points to
those used by people suffering from aphasia (that is, individuals who
are deprived of speech). Their findings support my assumption that
Tool and Symbol in Chūd Development
23
speech plays an essential role in the organization of higher psychological
functions.10
These experimental examples bring us full circle to the beginning
of our review of psychological theories regarding child development. 
Buhlers experiments indicate that the practical activity of the young
child prior to speech development is identical to that of the ape, and
Guillaume and Meyerson suggest that the ape’s behavior is akin to that
observed in people who are deprived of speech. Both of these lines of
work focus our attention on the importance of understanding the practical
activity of children at the age when they are just beginning to speak. 
My own work as well as that of my collaborators is directed at these
same problems. But our premises differ from those of previous investigators. 
Our primary concern is to describe and specify the development
of those forms of practical intelligence that are specifically human. 
RELATION BETWEEN SPEECH AND TOOL USE
In his classic experiments with apes Köhler demonstrated the
futility of attempting to develop even the most elementary sign and
symbolic operations in animals. He concluded that tool use among
apes is independent of symbolic activity. Further attempts to cultivate
productive speech in the ape have also produced negative results. These
experiments showed once more that the purposive behavior of the animal
is independent of any speech or sign-using activity. 
The study of tool use in isolation from sign use is common in research
work on the natural history of practical intellect, and psychologists
who studied the development of symbolic processes in the child
have followed the same procedure. Consequently, the origin and development
of speech, as well as all other sign-using activity, were treated
as independent of the organization of the child’s practical activity. 
Psychologists preferred to study the development of sign use as an
example of pure intellect and not as the product of the child’s developmental
history. They often attributed sign use to the child’s spontaneous
discovery of the relation between signs and their meanings. As W. Stem
stated, recognition of the fact that verbal signs have meaning constitutes
“the greatest discovery in the child’s life.”11 A number of authors fix
this happy “moment” at the juncture of the child’s first and second
year, regarding it as the product of the child’s mental activity. Detailed
examination of the development of speech and other forms of sign
use was assumed to be unnecessary. Instead, it has routinely been as-
Mind. m Society
24
sumed that the child’s mind contains all stages of future intellectual
development; they exist in complete form, awaiting the proper moment
to emerge. 
Not only were speech and practical intelligence assumed to have
different origins, but their joint participation in common operations
was considered to be of no basic psychological importance (as in the
work of Shapiro and Gerke). Even when speech and the use of tools
were closely linked in one operation, they were still studied as separate
processes belonging to two completely different classes of phenomena. 
At best, their simultaneous occurrence was considered a consequence
of accidental, external factors. 
The students of practical intelligence as well as those who study
speech development often fail to recognize the interweaving of these
two functions. Consequently, the children’s adaptive behavior and sign-
using activity are treated as parallel phenomena—a view that leads to
Piaget’s concept of “egocentric” speech.12 He did not attribute an
important role to speech in the organization of the child’s activities,
nor did he stress its communicative functions, although he was obliged
to admit its practical importance. 
Although practical intelligence and sign use can operate independently
of each other in young children, the dialectical unity of these
systems in the human adult is the very essence of complex human behavior. 
Our analysis accords symbolic activity a specific organizing
function that penetrates the process of tool use and produces fundamentally
new forms of behavior. 
SOCIAL INTERACTION AND THE TRANSFORMATION
OF PRACTICAL ACTIVITY
Based on the discussion in the previous section, and illustrated by
experimental work to be described later, the following conclusion may
be made: the most significant moment in the course of intellectual development,
which gives birth to the purely human forms of practical
and abstract intelligence, occurs when speech and practical activity,
two previously completely independent lines of development, converge. 
Although children s use of tools during their preverbal period is comparable
to that of apes, as soon as speech and the use of signs are
incorporated into any action, the action becomes transformed and organized
along entirely new lines. The specifically human use of tools is
thus realized, going beyond the more limited use of tools possible among
the higher animals. 
Tool and Symbol in Child Development
25
Prior to mastering his own behavior, the child begins to master his
surroundings with the help of speech. This produces new relations with
the environment in addition to the new organization of behavior itself. 
The creation of these uniquely human forms of behavior later produce
the intellect and become the basis of productive work: the specifically
human form of the use of tools. 
Observations of children in an experimental situation similar to
that of Köhlers apes show that the children not only act in attempting
to achieve a goal but also speak. As a rule this speech arises spontaneously
and continues almost without interruption throughout the experiment. 
It increases and is more persistent every time the situation becomes
more complicated and the goal more difficult to attain. Attempts
to block it (as the experiments of my collaborator R. E. Levina have
shown) are either futile or lead the child to “freeze up.”
Levina posed practical problems for four- and five-year-old children
such as obtaining a piece of candy from a cupboard. The candy was
placed out of reach so the child could not obtain it directly. As the child
got more and more involved in trying to obtain the candy, “egocentric”
speech began to manifest itself as part of her active striving. At first
this speech consisted of a description and analysis of the situation, but
it gradually took on a “planful” character, reflecting possible paths to
solution of the problem. Finally, it was included as part of the solution. 
For example, a four-and-a-half-year-old girl was asked to get candy
from a cupboard with a stool and a stick as possible tools. Levina’s
description reads as follows: (Stands on a stool, quietly looking, feeling
along a shelf with stick.) On the stool.” (Glances at experimenter. Puts
stick in other hand.) “Is that really the candy?” (Hesitates.) “I can get it
from that other stool, stand and get it.” (Gets second stool.) “No, that
doesn’t get it. I could use the stick.” (Takes stick, knocks at the candy.)
“It will move now.” (Knocks candy.) “It moved, I couldn’t get it with
the stool, but the, but the stick worked.”13
In such circumstances it seems both natural and necessary for
children to speak while they act; in our research we have found that
speech not only accompanies practical activity but also plays a specific
role in carrying it out. Our experiments demonstrate two important
facts:
(1) A child’s speech is as important as the role of action in attaining
the goal. Children not only speak about what they are doing; their
speech and action are part of one and the same complex psychological
function, directed toward the solution of the problem at hand. 
(2) The more complex the action demanded by the situation and
Mind in Society
26
the less direct its solution, the greater the importance played by speech
in the operation as a whole. Sometimes speech becomes of such vital
importance that, if not permitted to use it, young children cannot accomplish
the given task. 
These observations lead me to the conclusion that children solve
practical tasks with the help of their speech, as well as their eyes and
hands. This unity of perception, speech, and action, which ultimately
produces internalization of the visual field, constitutes the central subject
matter for any analysis of the origin of uniquely human forms of
behavior. 
To develop the first of these two points, we must ask: What is it that
really distinguishes the actions of the speaking child from the actions
of an ape when solving practical problems?
The first thing that strikes the experimenter is the incomparably
greater freedom of childrens operations, their greater independence
from the structure of the concrete, visual situation. Children, with the
aid of speech, create greater possibilities than apes can accomplish
through action. One important manifestation of this greater flexibility
is that the child is able to ignore the direct line between actor and goal. 
Instead, he engages in a number of preliminary acts, using what we
speak of as instrumental, or mediated (indirect), methods. In the process
of solving a task the child is able to include stimuli that do not lie within
the immediate visual field. Using words (one class of such stimuli) to
create a specific plan, the child achieves a much broader range of
activity, applying as tools not only those objects that lie near at hand,
but searching for and preparing such stimuli as can be useful in the
solution of the task, and planning future actions. 
Second, the practical operations of a child who can speak become
much less impulsive and spontaneous than those of the ape. The ape
typically makes a series of uncontrolled attempts to solve the given
problem. In contrast, the child who uses speech divides the activity into
two consecutive parts. She plans how to solve the problem through
speech and then carries out the prepared solution through overt activity. 
Direct manipulation is replaced by a complex psychological
process through which inner motivation and intentions, postponed in
time, stimulate their own development and realization. This new kind
of psychological structure is absent in apes, even in rudimentary forms. 
Finally, it is decisively important that speech not only facilitates the
child's effective manipulation of objects but also controls the chilďs own
behavior. Thus, with the help of speech children, unlike apes, acquire
the capacity to be both the subjects and objects of their own behavior. 
Tool and Symbol m Child Development
27
Experimental investigation of the egocentric speech of children engaged
in various activities such as that illustrated by Levina produced
the second fact of great importance demonstrated by our experiments:
the relative amount of egocentric speech, as measured by Piaget’s methods,
increases in relation to the difficulty of the child’s task.14 On the
basis of these experiments my collaborators and I developed the
hypothesis that children’s egocentric speech should be regarded as
the transitional form between external and internal speech. Functionally,
egocentric speech is the basis for inner speech, while in its external
form it is embedded in communicative speech. 
One way to increase the production of egocentric speech is to
complicate a task in such a way that the child cannot make direct use of
tools for its solution. When faced with such a challenge, the children’s
emotional use of language increases as well as their efforts to achieve a
less automatic, more intelligent solution. They search verbally for a
new plan, and their utterances reveal the close connection between egocentric
and socialized speech. This is best seen when the experimenter
leaves the room or fails to answer the children’s appeals for help. Upon
being deprived of the opportunity to engage in social speech, children
immediately switch over to egocentric speech. 
While the interrelationship of these two functions of language is
apparent in this setting, it is important to remember that egocentric
speech is linked to children’s social speech by many transitional forms. 
The first significant illustration of the link between these two language
functions occurs when children find that they are unable to solve a problem
by themselves. They then turn to an adult, and verbally describe the
method that they cannot carry out by themselves. The greatest change
in children’s capacity to use language as a problem-solving tool takes
place somewhat later in their development, when socialized speech
(which has previously been used to address an adult) is turned inward. 
Instead of appealing to the adult, children appeal to themselves; language
thus takes on an intrapersonal function in addition to its interpersonal
use. When children develop a method of behavior for guiding
themselves that had previously been used in relation to another
person, when they organize their own activities according to a social
form of behavior, they succeed in applying a social attitude to themselves. 
The history of the process of the internalization of social speech
is also the history of the socialization of children’s practical intellect. 
The relation between speech and action is a dynamic one in the
course of children’s development. The structural relation can shift even
during an experiment. The crucial change occurs as follows: At an
Mind in Society
28
early stage speech accompanies the child’s actions and reflects the
vicissitudes of problem solving in a disrupted and chaotic form. At
a later stage speech moves more and more toward the starting point of
the process, so that it comes to precede action. It functions then as an
aid to a plan that has been conceived but not yet realized in behavior. 
An interesting analogy can be found in children’s speech while drawing
(see also chapter 8). Young children name their drawings only after
they have completed them; they need to see them before they can decide
what they are. As children get older they can decide in advance what
they are going to draw. This displacement of the naming process signifies
a change in the function of speech. Initially speech follows actions, is
provoked by and dominated by activity. At a later stage, however, when
speech is moved to the starting point of an activity, a new relation between
word and action emerges. Now speech guides, determines, and
dominates the course of action; the planning function of speech comes
into being in addition to the already existing function of language to
reflect the external world.15
Just as a mold gives shape to a substance, words can shape an
activity into a structure. However, that structure may be changed or
reshaped when children learn to use language in ways that allow them
to go beyond previous experiences when planning future action. In
contrast to the notion of sudden discovery popularized by Stern, we
envisage verbal, intellectual activity as a series of stages in which the
emotional and communicative functions of speech are expanded by the
addition of the planning function. As a result the child acquires the ability
to engage in complex operations extending over time. 
Unlike the ape, which Köhler tells us is “the slave of its own visual
field,” children acquire an independence with respect to their concrete
surroundings; they cease to act in the immediately given and evident
space. Once children learn how to use the planning function of their
language effectively, their psychological field changes radically. A
view of the future is now an integral part of their approaches to their
surroundings. In subsequent chapters, I will describe the developmental
course of some of these central psychological functions in greater detail. 
To summarize what has been said thus far in this section: The
specifically human capacity for language enables children to provide
for auxiliary tools in the solution of difficult tasks, to overcome impulsive
action, to plan a solution to a problem prior to its execution, and to
master their own behavior. Signs and words serve children first and
foremost as a means of social contact with other people. The cognitive
and communicative functions of language then become the basis of a
Tool and Symbol in Child Development
29
new and superior form of activity in children, distinguishing them from
animals. 
The changes I have described do not occur in a one-dimensional,
even fashion. Our research has shown that very small children solve
problems using unique mixtures of processes. In contrast with adults,
who react differently to objects and to people, young children are likely
to fuse action and speech when responding to both objects and social
beings. This fusion of activity is analagous to syncretism in perception,
which has been described by many developmental psychologists. 
The unevenness I am speaking of is seen quite clearly in a situation
where small children, when unable to solve the task before them easily,
combine direct attempts to obtain the desired end with a reliance upon
emotional speech. At times speech expresses the children’s desires, while
at other times it serves as a substitute for actually achieving the goal. 
The child may attempt to solve the task through verbal formulations
and by appeals to the experimenter for help. This mixture of diverse
forms of activity was at first bewildering; but further observations drew
our attention to a sequence of actions that clarify the meaning of the
children’s behavior in such circumstances. For example, after completing
a number of intelligent and interrelated actions that should help him
solve a particular problem successfully, the child suddenly, upon
meeting a difficulty, ceases all attempts and turns for help to the experimenter. 
Any obstacle to the child’s efforts at solving the problem may
interrupt his activity. The child’s verbal appeal to another person is an
effort to fill the hiatus his activity has revealed. By asking a question, the
child indicates that he has, in fact, formulated a plan to solve the task
before him, but is unable to perform /all the necessary operations. 
Through repeated experiences or this type, children learn covertly
(mentally) to plan their activities. At the same time they enlist the assistance
of another person in accordance with the requirements of the
problem posed for them. The child’s ability to control another person’s
behavior becomes a necessary part of the child’s practical activity. 
Initially this problem solving in conjunction with another person is
not differentiated with respect to the roles played by the child and his
helper; it is a general, syncretic whole. We have more than once observed
that in the course of solving a task, children get confused because
they begin to merge the logic of what they are doing with the logic of
the same problem as it has to be solved with the cooperation of another
person. Sometimes syncretic action manifests itself when children realize
the hopelessness of their direct efforts to solve a problem. As in the
example from Levina’s work, children address the objects of their atten-
Mind in Society
30
tton equally with words and sticks, demonstrating the fundamental and
inseparable tie between speech and action in the child’s activity; this
unity becomes particularly clear when compared with the separation of
these processes in adults. 
In summary, children confronted with a problem that is slightly too
complicated for them exhibit a complex variety of responses including
direct attempts at attaining the goal, the use of tools, speech directed
toward the person conducting the experiment or speech that simply
accompanies the action, and direct, verbal appeals to the object of
attention itself. 
If analyzed dynamically, this alloy of speech and action has a very
specific function in the history of the child’s development; it also demonstrates
the logic of its own genesis. From the very first days of the child’s
development his activities acquire a meaning of their own in a system of
social behavior and, being directed towards a definite purpose, are refracted
through the prism of the child’s environment. The path from
object to child and from child to object passes through another person. 
This complex human structure is the product of a developmental process
deeply rooted in the links between individual and social history. 
6
Interaction between
Learning and Development
The problems encountered in the psychological analysis of teaching
cannot be correctly resolved or even formulated without addressing the
relation between learning and development in school-age children. Yet
it is the most unclear of all the basic issues on which the application of
child development theories to educational processes depends. Needless
to say, the lack of theoretical clarity does not mean that the issue is
removed altogether from current research efforts into learning; not one
study can avoid this central theoretical issue. But the relation between
learning and development remains methodologically unclear because
concrete research studies have embodied theoretically vague, critically
unevaluated, and sometimes internally contradictory postulates, premises,
and peculiar solutions to the problem of this fundamental relationship;
and these, of course, result in a variety of errors. 
Essentially, all current conceptions of the relation between development
and learning in children can be reduced to three major theoretical
positions. 
The first centers on the assumption that processes of child development
are independent of learning. Learning is considered a purely
external process that is not actively involved in development. It merely
utilizes the achievements of development rather than providing an
impetus for modifying its course. 
In experimental investigations of the development of thinking in
school children, it has been assumed that processes such as deduction
and understanding, evolution of notions about the world, interpretation
of physical causality, and mastery of logical forms of thought and abstract
logic all occur by themselves, without any 4nfluence from school
79
Mind in Society
80
learning. An example of such a theory is Piaget’s extremely complex and
interesting theoretical principles, which also shape the experimental
methodology he employs. The questions Piaget uses in the course of his
“clinical conversations” with children clearly illustrate his approach. 
When a five-year-old is asked “why doesn’t the sun fall?” it is assumed
that the child has neither a ready answer for such a question nor the
general capabilities for generating one. The point of asking questions
that are so far beyond the reach of the child’s intellectual skills is to
eliminate the influence of previous experience and knowledge. The
experimenter seeks to obtain the tendencies of children’s thinking in
“pure” form, entirely independent of learning.1
Similarly, the classics of psychological literature, such as the works
by Binet and others, assume that development is always a prerequisite
for learning and that if a child’s mental functions (intellectual operations)
have not matured to the extent that he is capable of learning a particular
subject, then no instruction will prove useful. They especially feared
premature instruction, the teaching of a subject before the child was
ready for it. All effort was concentrated on finding the lower threshold of
learning ability, the age at which a particular kind of learning first
becomes possible. 
Because this approach is based on the premise that learning trails
behind development, that development always outruns learning, it
precludes the notion that learning may play a role in the course of the
development or maturation of those functions activated in the course of
learning. Development or maturation is viewed as a precondition of
learning but never the result of it. To summarize this position: Learning
forms a superstructure over development, leaving the latter essentially
unaltered. 
The second major theoretical position is that learning is development. 
This identity is the essence of a group of theories that are quite
diverse in origin. 
One such theory is based on the concept of reflex, an essentially
old notion that has been extensively revived recently. Whether reading,
writing, or arithmetic is being considered, development is viewed as the
mastery of conditioned reflexes; that is, the process of learning is completely
and inseparably blended with the process of development. This
notion was elaborated by James, who reduced the learning process to
habit formation and identified the learning process with development. 
Reflex theories have at least one thing in common with theories
such as Piaget’s: in both, development is conceived of as the elaboration
and substitution of innate responses. As James expressed it, “Education,
Interaction between Learning and Development
81
in short, cannot be better described than by calling it the organization
of acquired habits of conduct and tendencies to behavior.”2 Development
itself is reduced primarily to the accumulation of all possible
responses. Any acquired response is considered either a more complex
form of or a substitute for the innate response. 
But despite the similarity between the first and second theoretical
positions, there is a major difference in their assumptions about the
temporal relationship between learning and developmental processes. 
Theorists who hold the first view assert that developmental cycles precede
learning cycles; maturation precedes learning and instruction must
lag behind mental growth. For the second group of theorists, both
processes occur simultaneously; learning and development coincide at
all points in the same way that two identical geometrical figures coincide
when superimposed. 
The third theoretical position on the relation between learning and
development attempts to overcome the extremes of the other two by
simply combining them. A clear example of this approach is Koffka’s
theory, in which development is based on two inherently different but
related processes, each of which influences the other.8 On the one hand
is maturation, which depends directly on the development of the nervous
system; on the other hand is learning, which itself is also a developmental
process. 
Three aspects of this theory are new. First, as we already noted, is
the combination of two seemingly opposite viewpoints, each of which
has been encountered separately in the history of science. The very fact
that these two viewpoints can be combined into one theory indicates
that they are not opposing and mutually exclusive but have something
essential in common. Also new is the idea that the two processes that
make up development are mutually dependent and interactive. Of
course, the nature of the interaction is left virtually unexplored in
Koffkas work, which is limited solely to very general remarks regarding
the relation between these two processes. It is clear that for Koffka the
process of maturation prepares and makes possible a specific process of
learning. The learning process then stimulates and pushes forward the
maturation process. The third and most important new aspect of this
theory is the expanded role it ascribes to learning in child development. 
This emphasis leads us directly to an old pedagogical problem, that of
formal discipline and the problem of transfer. 
Pedagogical movements that have emphasized formal discipline and
urged the teaching of classical languages, ancient civilizations, and
mathematics have assumed that regardless of the irrelevance of these
Mind in Society
82
particular subjects for daily living, they were of the greatest value for
the pupil’s mental development. A variety of studies have called into
question the soundness of this idea. It has been shown that learning in
one area has very little influence on overall development. For example,
reflex theorists Woodworth and Thorndike found that adults who, after
special exercises, had achieved considerable success in determining the
length of short lines, had made virtually no progress in their ability to
determine the length of long lines. These same adults were successfully
trained to estimate the size of a given two-dimensional figure, but this
training did not make them successful in estimating the size of a series
of other two-dimensional figures of various sizes and shapes. 
According to Thorndike, theoreticians in psychology and education
believe that every particular response acquisition directly enhances
overall ability in equal measure.4 Teachers believed and acted on the
basis of the theory that the mind is a complex of abilities—powers of
observation, attention, memory, thinking, and so forth—and that any
improvement in any specific ability results in a general improvement in
all abilities. According to this theory, if the student increased the attention
he paid to Latin grammar, he would increase his abilities to focus
attention on any task. The words “accuracy,” “quick-wittedness,” “ability
to reason,” “memory,” “power of observation,” “attention,” “concentration,”
and so forth are said to denote actual fundamental capabilities
that vary in accordance with the material with which they operate; these
basic abilities are substantially modified by studying particular subjects,
and they retain these modifications when they him to other areas. Therefore,
if someone learns to do any single thing well, he will also be able
to do other entirely unrelated things well as a result of some secret
connection. It is assumed that mental capabilities function independently
of the material with which they operate, and that the development
of one ability entails the development of others. 
Thorndike himself opposed this point of view. Through a variety of
studies he showed that particular forms of activity, such as spelling,
are dependent on the mastery of specific skills and material necessary for
the performance of that particular task. The development of one particular
capability seldom means the development of others. Thorndike
argued that specialization of abilities is even greater than superficial
observation may indicate. For example, if, out of a hundred individuals
we choose ten who display the ability to detect spelling errors or to
measure lengths, it is unlikely that these ten will display better abilities
regarding, for example, the estimation of the weight of objects. In the
Interaction between Learning and Development
83
same way, speed and accuracy in adding numbers are entirely unrelated
to speed and accuracy in being able to think up antonyms. 
This research shows that the mind is not a complex network of
general capabilities such as observation, attention, memory, judgment,
and so forth, but a set of specific capabilities, each of which is, to some
extent, independent of the others and is developed independently. 
Learning is more than the acquisition of the ability to think; it is the
acquisition of many specialized abilities for thinking about a variety of
things. Learning does not alter our overall ability to focus attention but
rather develops various abilities to focus attention on a variety of things. 
According to this view, special training affects overall development only
when its elements, material, and processes are similar across specific
domains; habit governs us. This leads to the conclusion that because
each activity depends on the material with which it operates, the
development of consciousness is the development of a set of particular,
independent capabilities or of a set of particular habits. Improvement
of one function of consciousness or one aspect of its activity can affect
the development of another only to the extent that there are elements
common to both functions or activities. 
Developmental theorists such as Koffka and the Gestalt School—who
hold to the third theoretical position outlined earlier—oppose Thorndike’s
point of view. They assert that the influence of learning is never
specific. From their study of structural principles, they argue that the
learning process can never be reduced simply to the formation of skills
but embodies an intellectual order that makes it possible to transfer
general principles discovered in solving one task to a variety of other
tasks. From this point of view, the child, while learning a particular
operation, acquires the ability to create structures of a certain type,
regardless of the diverse materials with which she is working and regardless
of the particular elements involved. Thus, Koffka does not conceive
of learning as limited to a process of habit and skill acquisition. The
relationship he posits between learning and development is not that of
an identity but of a more complex relationship. According to Thorndike,
learning and development coincide at all points, but for Koffka, development
is always a larger set than learning. Schematically, the relationship
between the two processes could be depicted by two concentric circles,
the smaller symbolizing the learning process and the larger the developmental
process evoked by learning. 
Once a child has learned to perform an operation, he thus assimilates
some structural principle whose sphere of application is other than just
Mind in Society
84
the operations of the type on whose basis the principle was assimilated. 
Consequently, in making one step in learning, a child makes two steps in
development, that is, learning and development do not coincide. This
concept is the essential aspect of the third group of theories we have
discussed. 
ZONE OF PROXIMAL DEVELOPMENT:
A NEW APPROACH
Although we reject all three theoretical positions discussed above,
analyzing them leads us to a more adequate view of the relation between
learning and development. The question to be framed in arriving at a
solution to this problem is complex. It consists of two separate issues:
first, the general relation between learning and development; and
second, the specific features of this relationship when children reach
school age. 
That children s learning begins long before they attend school is
the starting point of this discussion. Any learning a child encounters in
school always has a previous history. For example, children begin to
study arithmetic in school, but long beforehand they have had some
experience with quantity—they have had to deal with operations of
division, addition, subtraction, and determination of size. Consequently,
children have their own preschool arithmetic, which only myopic
psychologists could ignore. 
It goes without saying that learning as it occurs in the preschool
years differs markedly from school learning, which is concerned with the
assimilation of the fundamentals of scientific knowledge. But even when,
in the period of her first questions, a child assimilates the names of
objects in her environment, she is learning. Indeed, can it be doubted
that children learn speech from adults; or that, through asking questions
and giving answers, children acquire a variety of information; or that,
through imitating adults and through being instructed about how to
act, children develop an entire repository of skills? Learning and development
are interrelated from the child’s very first day of life. 
Koffka, attempting to clarify the laws of child learning and their
relation to mental development, concentrates his attention on the simplest
learning processes, those that occur in the preschool years. His error
is that, while seeing a similarity between preschool and school learning,
he fails to discern the difference—he does not see the specifically new
elements that school learning introduces. He and others assume that
the difference between preschool and school learning consists of non-
Interaction between Learning and Development
85
systematic learning in one case and systematic learning in the other. 
But “systematicness” is not the only issue; there is also the fact that
school learning introduces something fundamentally new into the child’s
development. In order to elaborate the dimensions of school learning, we
will describe a new and exceptionally important concept without which
the issue cannot be resolved: the zone of proximal development. 
A well known and empirically established fact is that learning
should be matched in some manner with the child’s developmental level. 
For example, it has been established that the teaching of reading, writing,
and arithmetic should be initiated at a specific age level. Only
recently, however, has attention been directed to the fact that we cannot
limit ourselves merely to determining developmental levels if we wish to
discover the actual relations of the developmental process to learning
capabilities. We must determine at least two developmental levels. 
The first level can be called the actual developmental level, that is,
the level of development of a child’s mental functions that has been
established as a result of certain already completed developmental
cycles. When we determine a child’s mental age by using tests, we are
almost always dealing with the actual developmental level. In studies
of children’s mental development it is generally assumed that only those
things that children can do on their own are indicative of mental abilities. 
We give children a battery of tests or a variety of tasks of varying
degrees of difficulty, and we judge the extent of their mental development
on the basis of how they solve them and at what level of difficulty. 
On the other hand, if we offer leading questions or show how the problem
is to be solved and the child then solves it, or if the teacher initiates
the solution and the child completes it or solves it in collaboration with
other children—in short, if the child barely misses an independent
solution of the problem—the solution is not regarded as indicative of his
mental development. This “truth” was familiar and reinforced by common
sense. Over a decade even the profoundest thinkers never questioned
the assumption; they never entertained the notion that what
children can do with the assistance of others might be in some sense
even more indicative of their mental development than what they can
do alone. 
Let us take a simple example. Suppose I investigate two children
upon entrance into school, both of whom are ten years old chronologically
and eight years old in terms of mental development. Can I say that
they are the same age mentally? Of course. What does this mean? It
means that they can independently deal with tasks up to the degree of
difficulty that has been standardized for the eight-year-old level. If I
Mind in Society
86
stop at this point, people would imagine that the subsequent course of
mental development and of school learning for these children will be
the same, because it depends on their intellect. Of course, there may be
other factors, for example, if one child was sick for half a year while
the other was never absent from school; but generally speaking, the fate
of these children should be the same. Now imagine that I do not
terminate my study at this point, but only begin it. These children seem
to be capable of handling problems up to an eight-year-old’s level, but
not beyond that. Suppose that I show them various ways of dealing with
the problem. Different experimenters might employ different modes of
demonstration in different cases: some might run through an entire demonstration
and ask the children to repeat it, others might initiate the
solution and ask the child to finish it, or offer leading questions. In short,
in some way or another I propose that the children solve the problem
with my assistance. Under these circumstances it turns out that the first
child can deal with problems up to a twelve-year-old’s level, the second
up to a nine-year-old’s. Now, are these children mentally the same?
When it was first shown that the capability of children with equal
levels of mental development to learn under a teacher’s guidance
varied to a high degree, it became apparent that those children were not
mentally the same age and that the subsequent course of their learning
would obviously be different. This difference between twelve and eight,
or between nine and eight, is what we call the zone of proximal development. 
It is the distance between the actual developmental level as determined
by independent problem solving and the level of potential
development as determined through problem solving under adult
guidance or in collaboration with more capable peers. 
If we naively ask what the actual developmental level is, or, to put it
more simply, what more independent problem solving reveals, the most
common answer would be that a child’s actual developmental level
defines functions that have already matured, that is, the end products of
development. If a child can do such-and-such independently, it means
that the functions for such-and-such have matured in her. What, then,
is defined by the zone of proximal development, as determined through
problems that children cannot solve independently but only with ąs-
sistance? The zone of proximal development defines those functions that
have not yet matured but are in the process of maturation, functions that
will mature tomorrow but are currently in an embryonic state. These
functions could be termed the “buds” or “flowers” of development
rather than the “fruits” of development. The actual developmental level
characterizes mental development retrospectively, while the zone of
Interaction between Learning and Development
87
proximal development characterizes mental development prospectively. 
The zone of proximal development furnishes psychologists and
educators with a tool through which the internal course of development
can be understood. By using this method we can take account of not
only the cycles and maturation processes that have already been completed
but also those processes that are currently in a state of formation,
that are just beginning to mature and develop. Thus, the zone of proximal
development permits us to delineate the child’s immediate future and his
dynamic developmental state, allowing not only for what already has
been achieved developmentally but also for what is in the course of
maturing. The two children in our example displayed the same mental
age from the viewpoint of developmental cycles already completed, but
the developmental dynamics of the two were entirely different. The
state of a child’s mental development can be determined only by clarifying
its two levels: the actual developmental level and the zone of
proximal development. 
I will discuss one study of preschool children to demonstrate that
what is in the zone of proximal development today will be the actual
developmental level tomorrow—that is, what a child can do with assistance
today she will be able to do by herself tomorrow. 
The American researcher Dorothea McCarthy showed that among
children between the ages of three and five there are two groups of
functions: those the children already possess, and those they can perform
under guidance, in groups, and in collaboration with one another but
which they have not mastered independently. McCarthy’s study demonstrated
that this second group of functions is at the actual developmental
level of five-to-seven-year-olds. What her subjects could do only
under guidance, in collaboration, and in groups at the age of three-to-five
years they could do independently when they reached the age of five-to-
seven years.5 Thus, if we were to determine only mental age—that is,
only functions that have matured—we would have but a summary of
completed development, while if we determine the maturing functions,
we can predict what will happen to these children between five and
seven, provided the same developmental conditions are maintained. The
zone of proximal development can become a powerful concept in developmental
research, one that can markedly enhance the effectiveness
and utility of the application of diagnostics of mental development to
educational problems. 
A full understanding of the concept of the zone of proximal
development must result in réévaluation of the role of imitation in learning. 
An unshakable tenet of classical psychology is that only the inde-
Mind in Society
88
pendent activity of children, not their imitative activity, indicates their
level of mental development. This view is expressed in all current
testing systems. In evaluating mental development, consideration is
given to only those solutions to test problems which the child reaches
without the assistance of others, without demonstrations, and without
leading questions. Imitation and learning are thought of as purely
mechanical processes. But recently psychologists have shown that a
person can imitate only that which is within her developmental level. 
For example, if a child is having difficulty with a problem in arithmetic
and the teacher solves it on the blackboard, the child may grasp the
solution in an instant. But if the teacher were to solve a problem in
higher mathematics, the child would not be able to understand the
solution no matter how many times she imitated it. 
Animal psychologists, and in particular Köhler, have dealt with this
question of imitation quite well.® Kohler’s experiments sought to determine
whether primates are capable of graphic thought. The principal
question was whether primates solved problems independently or
whether they merely imitated solutions they had seen performed earlier,
for example, watching other animals or humans use sticks and other
tools and then imitating them. Köhlers special experiments, designed
to determine what primates could imitate, reveal that primates can use
imitation to solve only those problems that are of the same degree of
difficulty as those they can solve alone. However, Köhler failed to take
account of an important fact, namely, that primates cannot be taught (in
the human sense of the word) through imitation, nor can their intellect
be developed, because they have no zone of proximal development. A
primate can learn a great deal through training by using its mechanical
and mental skills, but it cannot be made more intelligent, that is, it
cannot be taught to solve a variety of more advanced problems independently. 
For this reason animals are incapable of learning in the
human sense of the term; human learning presupposes a specific social
nature and a process by which children grow into the intellectual life of
those around them. 
Children can imitate a variety of actions that go well beyond the
limits of their own capabilities. Using imitation, children are capable
of doing much more in collective activity or under the guidance of
adults. This fact, which seems to be of little significance in itself, is of
fundamental importance in that it demands a radical alteration of the
entire doctrine concerning the relation between learning and development
in children. One direct consequence is a change in conclusions that
may be drawn from diagnostic tests of development. 
Interaction between Learning and Development
89
Formerly, it was believed that by using tests, we determine the
mental development level with which education should reckon and
whose limits it should not exceed. This procedure oriented learning
toward yesterday’s development, toward developmental stages already
completed. The error of this view was discovered earlier in practice
than in theory. It is demonstrated most clearly in the teaching of
mentally retarded children. Studies have established that mentally
retarded children are not very capable of abstract thinking. From this
the pedagogy of the special school drew the seemingly correct conclusion
that all teaching of such children should be based on the
use of concrete, look-and-do methods. And yet a considerable amount
of experience with this method resulted in profound disillusionment. 
It turned out that a teaching system based solely on concreteness—
one that eliminated from teaching everything associated with abstract
thinking—not only failed to help retarded children overcome their
innate handicaps but also reinforced their handicaps by accustoming
children exclusively to concrete thinking and thus suppressing the
rudiments of any abstract thought that such children still have. Precisely
because retarded children, when left to themselves, will never
achieve well-elaborated forms of abstract thought, the school should
make every effort to push them in that direction and to develop in
them what is intrinsically lacking in their own development. In the
current practices of special schools for retarded children, we can observe
a beneficial shift away from this concept of concreteness, one that
restores look-and-do methods to their proper role. Concreteness is now
seen as necessary and unavoidable only as a stepping stone for developing
abstract thinking—as a means, not as an end in itself. 
Similarly, in normal children, learning which is oriented toward developmental
levels that have already been reached is ineffective from
the viewpoint of a child’s overall development. It does not aim for
a new stage of the developmental process but rather lags behind this
process. Thus, the notion of a zone of proximal development enables us
to propound a new formula, namely that the only “good learning” is
that which is in advance of development. 
The acquisition of language can provide a paradigm for the entire
problem of the relation between learning and development. Language
arises initially as a means of communication between the child and the
people in his environment. Only subsequently, upon conversion to
internal speech, does it come to organize the child’s thought, that is,
become an internal mental function. Piaget and others have shown
that reasoning occurs in a children’s group as an argument intended
Mind in Society
90
to prove one’s own point of view before it occurs as an internal activity
whose distinctive feature is that the child begins to perceive and check
the basis of his thoughts. Such observations prompted Piaget to conclude
that communication produces the need for checking and confirming
thoughts, a process that is characteristic of adult thought.7 In the
same way that internal speech and reflective thought arise from the
interactions between the child and persons in her environment, these
interactions provide the source of development of a child’s voluntary
behavior. Piaget has shown that cooperation provides the basis for the
development of a child’s moral judgment. Earlier research established
that a child first becomes able to subordinate her behavior to rules in
group play and only later does voluntary self-regulation of behavior
arise as an internal function. 
These individual examples illustrate a general developmental law
for the higher mental functions that we feel can be applied in its entirety
to children’s learning processes. We propose that an essential
feature of learning is that it creates the zone of proximal development;
that is, learning awakens a variety of internal developmental processes
that are able to operate only when the child is interacting with people
in his environment and in cooperation with his peers. Once these processes
are internalized, they become part of the child’s independent
developmental achievement. 
From this point of view, learning is not development; however,
properly organized learning results in mental development and sets in
motion a variety of developmental processes that would be impossible
apart from learning. Thus, learning is a necessary and universal aspect
of the process of developing culturally organized, specifically human,
psychological functions. 
To summarize, the most essential feature of our hypothesis is the
notion that developmental processes do not coincide with learning
processes. Rather, the developmental process lags behind the learning
process; this sequence then results in zones of proximal development. 
Our analysis alters the traditional view that at the moment a child
assimilates the meaning of a word, or masters an operation such as
addition or written language, her developmental processes are basically
completed. In fact, they have only just begun at that moment. The
major consequence of analyzing the educational process in this manner
is to show that the initial mastery of, for example, the four arithmetic
operations provides the basis for the subsequent development of a
variety of highly complex internal processes in children’s thinking. 
Our hypothesis establishes the unity but not the identity of learning
Interaction between Learning and Development
91
processes and internal developmental processes. It presupposes that the
one is converted into the other. Therefore, it becomes an important concern
of psychological research to show how external knowledge and
abilities in children become internalized. 
Any investigation explores some sphere of reality. An aim of the
psychological analysis of development is to describe the internal relations
of the intellectual processes awakened by school learning. In this
respect, such analysis will be directed inward and is analogous to the
use of x-rays. If successful, it should reveal to the teacher how developmental
processes stimulated by the course of school learning are carried
through inside the head of each individual child. The revelation of this
internal, subterranean developmental network of school subjects is a task
of primary importance for psychological and educational analysis. 
A second essential feature of our hypothesis is the notion that,
although learning is directly related to the course of child development,
the two are never accomplished in equal measure or in parallel. Development
in children never follows school learning the way a shadow
follows the object that casts it. In actuality, there are highly complex
dynamic relations between developmental and learning processes that
cannot be encompassed by an unchanging hypothetical formulation. 
Each school subject has its own specific relation to the course of
child development, a relation that varies as the child goes from one
stage to another. This leads us directly to a reexamination of the problem
of formal discipline, that is, to the significance of each particular
subject from the viewpoint of overall mental development. Clearly, the
problem cannot be solved by using any one formula; extensive and
highly diverse concrete research based on the concept of the zone of
proximal development is necessary to resolve the issue. 
7
The Role of Play
in Development
To define play as an activity that gives pleasure to the child is
inaccurate for two reasons. First, many activities give the child much
keener experiences of pleasure than play, for example, sucking a pacifier,
even though the child is not being satiated. And second, there are
games in which the activity itself is not pleasurable, for example, games,
predominantly at the end of preschool and the beginning of school age,
that give pleasure only if the child finds the result interesting. Sporting
games (not only athletic sports, but other games that can be won or
lost) are very often accompanied by displeasure when the outcome is
unfavorable to the child. 
But while pleasure cannot be regarded as the defining characteristic
of play, it seems to me that theories which ignore the fact that play fulfills
children’s needs result in a pedantic intellectualization of play. In speaking
of child development in more general terms, many theorists mistakenly
disregard the child’s needs—understood in the broadest sense to
include everything that is a motive for action. We often describe a
child’s development as the development of his intellectual functions;
every child stands before us as a theoretician who, characterized by
a higher or lower level of intellectual development, moves from one
stage to another. But if we ignore the child’s needs, and the incentives
which are effective in getting him to act, we will never be able to understand
his advance from one developmental stage to the next, because
every advance is connected with a marked change in motives, inclinations,
and incentives. That which is of the greatest interest to the infant
has almost ceased to interest the toddler. The maturing of needs is a
dominant issue in this discussion because it is impossible to ignore the
92